The Parrot and the Grocer
There was once a grocer who owned a handsome green parrot who sang
sublimely and spoke most eloquently. The parrot was not only an ideal
companion but also the perfect guard for the grocer’s shop. He kept watch all
hours of the day and spoke amiably with the customers, entertaining them
and thus increasing the grocer’s sales.
One day when the grocer left the shop in the parrot’s care, having gone
home for lunch, a cat suddenly ran into the shop chasing a mouse, frightening
the bird. As the parrot fl ew about in his effort to save himself, he knocked a
few bottles of almond oil off the shelves, breaking them and covering himself
and the shop fl oor in oil.
Not long afterward, the grocer returned and found the place in disarray,
the fl oor slippery with oil and the parrot perching guiltily in a corner. In the
wink of an eye, the grocer lost his temper and hit the bird on the head with
all his might. The poor bird, who was already feeling guilty and downtrodden
about his clumsiness, could not bear the shame, not to mention the pain from
the blow, and he instantly shed all the feathers on his head.
Soon after the almond oil incident, the parrot completely stopped speaking and singing. The grocer realized how grave his mistake had been in striking
the bird; not only had he lost his jolly companion but he had also curtailed
his thriving business. Having no one but himself to blame, he now felt dumbfounded that he had singlehandedly threatened his very livelihood.
“I wish I’d broken my hand!” he lamented. “How could I have struck my
sweet-voiced bird like that? How could I have behaved so monstrously?”
The grocer began to give alms to each and every poor darvish who passed
by his shop, hoping that by doing good deeds he might be forgiven, and his
bird might again start to exercise his mesmerizing voice. After three days and
nights of remorse and suffering the parrot’s silence, the grocer came into luck. 
7
A bald darvish walked into the shop, and instantly the parrot began to speak:
“Did you spill bottles of almond oil, too?”
The handful of customers in the shop were amused and smiled at the
parrot, who had innocently thought that the bald man had suffered the same
fate as himself!
“Darling little parrot,” said one of the customers compassionately, “never
equate one action with another. One must never compare oneself to others,
even though they may appear to be the same on the surface; truly nothing is
as it seems!”
8
The Angel of Death
Solomon, the wise prophet, held daily audiences during which he listened
to his subjects’ complaints and tried to address their problems. One
morning, as he was listening to one person after another, a distraught man
hurled himself into the great court. Solomon noticed how distressed the man
was and beckoned him forward. Grateful for being invited to the front of the
queue, the man fell to his knees before the great benefactor.
“What seems to be causing you such anguish, my dear fellow?” asked
Solomon compassionately.
“The Angel of Death, my lord! I saw him a minute ago as I was crossing
the street. He glared at me with such disdain that my heart nearly stopped!”
“We all know that Azrael takes his orders only from God and never
wavers in his duties,” asserted the great prophet. “Now tell me, what would
you have me do?”
“I beg of you, my life’s in your hands. Please tell the wind to carry me to
India, where I’ll be safe from the Angel’s harm.”
Promptly Solomon ordered the East Wind to carry the nearly paralyzed
man to India and lay him down wherever he chose. He then duly returned to
his other subjects’ unattended affairs.
The following day when he returned to court, Solomon caught a glimpse
of the Angel of Death among the crowd. He motioned the Angel to approach
and asked him: “Why do you frighten people with that wrathful look, to the
point that they abandon their livelihood and forsake their homes and family?
What had that poor man done yesterday to deserve your crushing glare?”
Azrael was surprised. “My lord, I didn’t look at him wrathfully at all! In
fact, I was astonished to see him!” he said. “God had commanded me to take
his pitiful life today in India, and I couldn’t imagine, even if he had a million
wings, how was he to get there on time. I was startled and gazed at him with
surprise, not anger!”
When you look at everything in life with the eyes of want and greed,
whom do you hope to escape? Yourself ? God? Is that possible?
9
The Fly Who Thought She Was a Sailor
A poor donkey had been patiently carrying his heavy load all day long
without a moment’s respite. He had not even been allowed to stop to
pee. Finally, his owner reached his destination, and the donkey was relieved of
the merchandise heaped on his back. Free at last from his burden, the beast
happily emptied his full bladder.
A short distance away, a tiny fl y was resting on a leaf lying on the ground.
The donkey’s urine, fl owing downstream, began to carry the leaf with the fl y
on it. The fl y was initially taken aback, not quite understanding what was happening. After a little while, though, she began to believe: “I’m sailing away on
the sea. I’m the captain of this ship, and what a perfectly seasoned navigator I
am! Who dares to stop me now?”
The fl y was gloating in her pride, fl oating on the stream of urine, believing that she was sailing the seven seas. Unbeknown to her, she was still the
same lowly fl y she’d always been, driven along by the furious pace of the urine’s
fl ow, unaware that nothing truly is as it seems.
10
Merchant and Parrot
Many years ago, a Persian merchant was given a beautiful parrot as a gift
by his Indian trading partners. He kept the parrot in a formidable cage,
where he could watch her and listen to her melodious song every day when he
rested after his long hours at work. The time of year came when he normally
traveled to India on a buying trip, and as is customary he asked his household
help what they wanted him to bring back as gifts for them. Each person asked
for something close to his or her heart, and so did the little green parrot.
“My dear master, my heart really desires nothing from my motherland,”
she said morosely. “But, should you come across a group of parrots like
myself, would you please convey my greetings and tell them that I’m trapped
in a cage in Persia, and I miss them terribly. Ask them whether they think it’s
fair that they’re fl ying freely throughout the land while their cousin is slowly
dying in captivity. I beg you to ask them on my behalf for advice on how I
should reckon my situation.”
The merchant didn’t think much about the parrot’s demand but promised
to fi nd the birds and deliver her message exactly as she had voiced it. Once in
India, he diligently tended to his business but did not forget his promise of
gifts for his servants or the parrot’s message. One day, traveling from one town
to the next, he happened to come across a group of parrots chirping noisily
in a forest. He stopped his horse and delivered his parrot’s message faithfully,
but before he could fi nish, one of the parrots began to shiver uncontrollably,
falling off the branch he’d been perched on and suddenly dying. The merchant
ran to save the parrot, but the little bird looked perfectly dead!
He became distraught, feeling overwhelming guilt that he’d caused the
poor bird’s demise unnecessarily. He wondered whether the fallen bird was
related to his parrot and had literally died from grief hearing about his trapped
cousin. Was it not true that the human tongue is like an uneasy aggregation
of rock and iron, which, when struck against each other, can spark off a fi re?
He regretted having recounted his parrot’s message, but there was nothing he 
11
could do now, so he continued with his duties until he fi nished them up, and
then he returned home.
Upon his arrival, he distributed the gifts that each servant had asked for
but said nothing to his parrot. The bird, who had been impatiently awaiting
the response of her mates, grew increasingly impatient and at last couldn’t
hold back any longer, asking the merchant: “So, where’s my gift? Tell me, what
did you see and hear from the Indian parrots?”
“I’d rather not remember!” said the merchant somberly.
“Master, what’s the matter? Why this long face?”
“I told your story to a group of parrots in the woods,” he said reluctantly.
“But, before I could fi nish, one of them began to shiver, then fell from the tree
and died! I’ll never forgive myself for causing the poor bird’s death. But what’s
the use? Once the arrow has left the bow it will never return, and so are words
that leave our lips.”
But before the merchant could fi nish his sentence, the little parrot fell
from her perch and dropped dead on the fl oor of the cage. The merchant
could hardly believe his eyes; he burst into tears, quickly blaming himself for
causing yet another innocent death. He became hysterical, cursing and repenting, not comprehending why all this was happening. He walked back and forth
staring at his bird, who lay motionless on a heap of leaves on the fl oor of her
exquisite cage. He caressed the parrot’s feathers tenderly, remembering her
harmonious song, which had given him so much pleasure for so long.
After a while, the merchant hesitantly opened the dainty cage door and carefully picked up the bird, carrying her to the garden and laying her on the ground
while he dug a grave to bury her. Instantly, the parrot shot up to the nearest tree
and perched on a high branch, looking contentedly at her former master. The
merchant was awestruck, not fathoming the secret of the words he had uttered.
“My darling bird, I’m thrilled to see you’re alive and well, but tell me,
what did I say that prompted you to emulate your cousin in India? Tell me
your secret now that you’re free.”
“That parrot was no relation to me, but by his action he taught me how
to free myself!” confessed the jolly parrot. “Without actually speaking, he 
12
helped me understand that my imprisonment was due to my beautiful song,
my talent for entertaining you and your guests. My precious voice was in fact
the cause of my servitude! By his action, he taught me that my freedom would
lie in the act of dying in the sense of forsaking my attachment to my worldly
talents, which I had prized so highly.”
The parrot bid her merchant master farewell for the last time and quickly
fl ew out of sight.
13
The Old Harp Player
Gifted musicians were a great rarity in the old days, but it was during the
reign of the famous Caliph Omar that a certain competent harp player
earned himself a fi ne reputation. Spectators loved his voice, the melodious
sound of his instrument, and his entertaining presence, and thus they paid
him handsomely every time he played.
The years passed quickly; the musician aged, and his voice lost its sweet
timbre. People no longer appreciated him, and the more he tried to sing,
the more his voice sounded like the braying of a donkey. People would
shoo him away, and by the time he turned seventy, he was impoverished and
unemployable. Eventually he came to the end of his tether and at long last
turned to God:
“My Allah, You’ve granted me a long life but I’ve been guilty! I never
appreciated Your kindness, yet You never turned Your back on me and always
provided me with my daily bread. But now, I’m old and feeble and no longer
have a beautiful voice. In fact, my singing revolts people when not so long ago
they couldn’t get enough of it. I promise You that as of today I will only play
and sing for You, my Beloved, and nobody else!” He sighed and, wishing for a
little privacy, began to walk toward the town cemetery.
He found the graveyard empty as he walked silently, swerving between
gravestones, until he fi nally chose a spot to sit down. Making himself as comfortable as possible, he began to play his harp to his heart’s content until he
was utterly exhausted and eventually fell asleep. He dreamed that he was in
a lush meadow and that his soul’s wings fully opened, carrying him lightly
toward the sun. He wished from the bottom of his heart that he could stay
fl oating in the air forever; but fate would not have it, as his time on earth was
not yet up. At that very same moment, Caliph Omar, who was in his palace,
uncharacteristically fell asleep in the middle of the day and had a dream in
which God instructed him as follows:
14
“Omar, it’s time to tend to my special subject! You can fi nd him asleep
among the gravestones. Take seven hundred dinars from the public funds that
you collect on my behalf and take them to him as his wages. Tell him to come
back to you for more after he’s spent it.”
Omar woke up with trepidation, grasping the urgency of his dream. He
quickly ran to the graveyard and searched but could only fi nd an old man
asleep by a grave with an ancient harp by his side. At fi rst, he wasn’t convinced
that this could be God’s special subject, so he searched further but to no
avail. At last he concluded that the harp player must be the man he was sent
to fi nd. Unwilling to disturb the old man, as he looked so peaceful, Omar
quietly sat down beside him but then suddenly sneezed. The old man woke
up with a fright and noticed the regal person sitting next to him. His heart in
his mouth, he began to beg God to save him from what he thought was the
Angel of Death.
Amused, Omar told him gently: “No need to fear me, dear one, I’ve
brought you good tidings. In fact, Allah has greatly praised you and has asked
me to pass on His blessings. He’s also sent you seven hundred dinars for your
overdue wages! When you’ve spent it, you’re to come back to me for more.”
The old musician couldn’t believe his ears and became even more distraught than before. Agitated, he let out a heart-wrenching cry, tore off his
tattered shirt, and, greatly addled, bit into his own hand. “One and only Allah,
You’ve shamed me into nothingness!” he sobbed as he stood up and rambled
aimlessly through the graveyard.
In due time, he stumbled back to fi nd Omar and his harp still in the
same spot as before. He picked up his precious instrument and, in one quick
strike, shattered it against a nearby gravestone, destroying his only source of
livelihood. “You’ve been the veil between God and me,” he blamed the harp.
“You’re responsible for leading me astray from His altar. For almost seventy
years, you’ve sucked my blood and made me shamefaced before my Creator,”
he said as he bashed the harp again and again, reducing it to insignifi cant slivers of wood.
15
“I beg Your forgiveness, my God,” he continued. “I’ve sinned throughout
this long life that You’ve gifted me. I’ve spent it singing and playing music,
forgetting the pain of being separated from You, and I and no one else am the
cause of my guilt and shame,” he confessed. “Please save me from myself, for
my enemy is within me, closer to me than my own pathetic soul!”
Omar comforted the agitated man, telling him that he must let go of his
past as well as his future, for he was still entangled between them; and that
meant that he was not yet one with God and had not yet put his full trust
in the Creator. As he listened to Omar’s wise words, the old musician felt a
purer light rising in his heart, enveloping his body and soul. Astounded, he
felt that he was letting go of the world he had known until then and found
himself positioned in a different space, untouched by superfi ciality; a world
that required an alternative understanding where no words were left to speak,
where solitude and silence were the order of the day.
16
The Sailor and the Professor
I
t was late in the day, and the professor needed to cross the water to get back
to the island where he lived. He jumped into the fi rst boat he chanced upon
and ordered the sailor to take him home as fast as he could. The boat slowly
pulled away from the harbor, and the professor made himself comfortable on
the deck. He took one long look at the sailor and decided that this man must
be illiterate, and before he could control his tongue, he blurted out pompously: “Have you ever been to school or studied any literature?”
“No,” said the sailor innocently.
“Then you’ve missed out on half of your life, my good man!”
The sailor was deeply insulted but didn’t respond, carrying on with his
work and waiting for an opportune moment to take his revenge.
Almost halfway through their journey, the weather turned, and a vicious
storm kicked up. The sailor had fi nally chanced upon his moment of sweet
revenge! Cunningly, he asked the professor, who was already white with fright:
“Most revered master professor, do you know how to swim?”
“Don’t be silly, of course not, my handsome and capable friend!” he stammered squeamishly.
“Oh, what a pity! Because now you’re going to miss out on the rest of
your life! The boat is caught up in a whirlpool, and the only way out is to
swim! Now all your precious literature can’t help you one bit. You thought me
an idiot, and now look at you! Stuck in the mud like an ass!”
17
The Man Who Wanted a Tattoo
There is a town called Qazvin in central Persia where it was customary for
wrestlers to tattoo parts of their bodies. One day, a man, who was not in
fact a wrestler but who wished to pretend that he was brave and mighty, went
to a tattoo artist who worked in the public bathhouse. He asked the artist to
create a beautiful design on his arm that befi tted his courage.
“What kind of design would you prefer?” asked the artist.
“A fi erce lion, what else? My zodiac sign is the mighty Leo, so make sure
you use the darkest blue you ever tattooed on anyone!” said the man arrogantly.
The tattoo artist took out his ink and pins and set to work. It only took
a couple of piercings before the man couldn’t bear the burning pain of the
needle, and he snapped: “Which part of the lion are you tattooing?”
“I’ve started with the tail, sir.”
“Leave it; leave the tail alone and start elsewhere,” agonized the fake
wrestler.
The artist went back to work, but as soon as he pierced the man’s arm
again the man began to scream in pain: “Which part are you painting now?”
“The lion’s ear,” reported the artist.
“Leave it; leave the ear alone and start elsewhere!” screeched the man,
tears in his eyes.
The artist huffed and puffed but didn’t say a word, going back to his
work. Once again the fake wrestler began to scream: “What are you doing?
Which part are you tattooing now?”
“The belly of the lion, sir,” said the artist with disdain.
“Oh my God, this is unbelievable! Leave the belly alone, it’s much too
painful!” the man whined, unable to bear the burning pain. “Why should a
beautiful lion need a belly at all?”
The tattoo artist was at his wit’s end. Totally exasperated, he threw his
tools to the ground and stepped away from his client.
18
“What kind of a lion tattoo doesn’t have a tail, an ear, or a belly? God has
not created such a lion!” he snapped. “Get out of my sight and don’t ever dare
show your face at my parlor again!”
Before the fake wrestler could even begin to complain, the tattoo artist
grabbed him by the scruff of the neck and threw him out of the bathhouse
into the cold winter air outside.
19
The Lion, the Wolf, and the Fox
A lion, a wolf, and a fox had become hunting partners. The lion was reluctant to be seen with the lowly fox and wolf but had yielded to their
company because he thought it was his duty as the king of the prairie to
allow them to benefi t from his grace. Just as stars receive their light from the
sun, the lion felt obliged to be magnanimous with respect to weaker and less
worthy animals.
Their fi rst hunt together in the high country was successful; under the
lion’s tutelage, the trio managed to capture a bull, a mountain goat, and a fat
rabbit. With the lion’s help, the two smaller animals carried their rich hunt
from the mountain down to the prairie, their hunger growing by the minute.
The wolf and the fox were too frightened to raise the issue of how the prey
should be divided, but deep in their hearts they believed that the mighty lion
would be fair in giving them their share; in fact, perhaps he would let them
have most of the catch, as he was so magnanimous! The lion, for his part,
could sense what his two companions were thinking, but he decided to remain
quiet until an opportune moment arose when he would show them who was
the decision maker among them.
“You lowly beasts, was my precious company not enough for you?”
thought the lion to himself. “How dare you think that you can infl uence or
predict my decisions? Don’t you understand that every thought you have, every
action you may take, are possible only because of me?”
While he entertained these thoughts, the lion erupted into laughter,
prompting the wolf and the fox into thinking that soon they’d be fi lling their
empty stomachs with their prey.
“Wolf,” called out the lion. “Be my agent and divide the game. Be absolutely fair in your allocation. Show me what you’re made of!” he challenged
the wolf.
“My king, the big bull must be yours as it’s the largest catch,” declared the
wolf, thinking he’d come to the best conclusion. “The mountain goat goes to
me, as it’s smaller and befi ts my size. The rabbit suffi ces the fox.”
20
“You dare speak of yourself in my presence?” snapped the lion. “Fancying that you even exist while in the company of an unrivaled, majestic king is
blasphemy! Come forward quickly,” he ordered.
As soon as the wolf took his fi rst step, the lion lifted his monstrous paw
and ripped his head off, then shredded his body, leaving just a shell. “This
low-born creature was entirely ruled by his ego! No room for him in my kingdom!” announced the lion nobly.
Once he was fi nished with the wolf, the lion turned to the fox. “Fox, it’s
your turn to divide the loot. Hurry up, as I’m feeling peckish.”
The fox bowed respectfully, swallowing his fear. “Your honor, this fat
bull is for your delightful breakfast,” he said with nervous discomfort. “The
mountain goat will be appropriate for your lunch, and the rabbit will suffi ce
for your delectable supper.”
“Where did you learn how to divide the loot in this manner?” asked the
surprised lion king.
“From watching the desecrated body of the wolf, your honor.”
“You’re a smart fox,” the lion admitted. “You’ve been absorbed into your
love for me, and you’ve stopped regarding yourself as separate from the object
of your love. Now you can only see me while you no longer exist; that’s why I
will let you have all three catches. Take them and be gone; I’ll never hurt you.
You may not only have the prey but I, too, am yours now! One who learns a
lesson from watching his friends’ mistakes is indeed the wisest one.”
The fox couldn’t believe his luck, silently giving thanks to God that the
lion had fi rst chosen the wolf to divide the loot; otherwise, it would have been
his dead corpse sprawled over the prairie.
21
The Deaf Man and His Sick Neighbor
A man had been losing his hearing for some time but was too proud to
admit his debility and continued to pretend that nothing was wrong
with him. One day, a friend bumped into him outside his home and told him
that the old man next door had taken ill and that it would be kind to pay him
a visit, as he had no relatives to drop in on him. The nearly deaf man somehow
made out what his friend was telling him and promised to visit his neighbor
that very same day.
How was he going to approach his sick neighbor, wondered the deaf man,
especially now that he had become ill and weak and likely able to speak only in
a whisper? But there was no way out of it; custom decreed that he pay the old
man a visit and inquire after his health. He decided that he’d decipher what the
patient was saying by reading his lips and respond accordingly. Nevertheless,
just to be on the safe side, he prearranged his questions in his mind and his
neighbor’s probable answers accordingly.
He decided that when he asked, “How are you feeling?” the sick neighbor
would probably say, “Thanks be to Allah, I’m surviving.” Then he’d say to
him, “That’s wonderful, thank goodness!” and continue: “What did you have
to eat today?” The neighbor would probably reply, “I had a lovely vegetable
soup, with a glass of cooling sherbet,” to which he would respond: “Bon
appétit; how wonderful!” In addition, he would ask: “Which doctor has prescribed your medication?” and the patient would probably tell him the name
of one of the local doctors, to which he’d confi rm, “Fantastic, he’s the best
in the trade.”
Thus, he was encouraged by his plan and immediately went next door to
pay his visit. He sat next to the old man’s bedding, which was spread out on
the fl oor, and kindly asked him: “How are you feeling, my dear neighbor?”
“I’m dying!” moaned the sick man.
“Thank God!” the deaf man said jovially, and continued with his next
question, which he had duly prepared: “What did you eat last night?”
22
“Poison!” retorted the old man, already upset by the fi rst answer.
“Bon appétit!” the deaf man responded obliviously.
The sick man, made even more upset by the last comment, bit his lips
to stop himself from swearing at his annoying visitor. The deaf man, though,
continued with his inquiries: “Which doctor is treating you?”
“Azrael, the Angel of Death!” snapped the sick man.
“May he be blessed. His presence is always good news; whomever he visits
is cured of all his pains and aches forever!”
Unaware of the damage he had done to his sick neighbor’s state of mind,
the deaf man took his hand and shook it fi rmly before taking his leave, believing that he had done his neighborly duty and brought the sick man much joy
and relief.
23
Chinese and Greek Painters
Chinese painters and their Greek counterparts in Asia Minor had been
great rivals since the beginning of time, each considering themselves
superior to the other. No one was truly able to say whose style was more
sophisticated or which painters’ works were more beautiful. This rivalry had
gone on for much too long, and the sultan of Rûm, in Asia Minor, had
become weary of the tireless backbiting on both sides.
Finally, he decided to stage a competition to establish once and for all
which painters were the most accomplished and the worthiest of their time.
The sultan decided to assign two of his empty cottages, which faced each
other on the palace grounds, to the two groups of competing contestants.
The Chinese were to occupy one cottage, while the Greek painters were to live
and work in the one opposite. They had one month to present their projects
to the sultan.
The Chinese were eager to begin work and asked for numerous colors
of paint, immediately setting out to draw their designs on the walls of their
house. The Greeks asked for nothing. They had brought with them special
stones for polishing the surface of the walls. Shortly after arrival in their cottage, they began the grueling task of rubbing down the residue of many years
of rot and decay that covered all the walls in their cottage.
It took the Greek painters countless hours of arduous work to remove
the effects of many years of wear and tear on the aged walls, old paint and
mildew that they scrubbed and polished over and over again. Meanwhile, their
Chinese counterparts were busy applying layers and layers of paint, beautifying their own designs as they covered over what remained of the old paint.
The Greek painters were well aware of the art of the Chinese and were
familiar with their methods. The Chinese, though, had no idea what the
Greeks were up to. People were impatient to see what the great artists of their
time had been working on and could hardly wait a day longer. After a month
of labor, at last the artists were ready to show their masterpieces to the ultimate judge, the sultan.
24
The judging day was upon them, and both groups of painters impatiently
awaited the sultan’s arrival. Musicians fi lled the palace grounds, and people
danced and made merry while awaiting the fi nal results to be called out. The
sultan eventually arrived with his entourage and went directly to view the
Chinese chef-d’oeuvre. The designs and the colors applied to the walls of the
small cottage had transformed it into a grand palace of dreams! He had never
seen such beautiful art in his life and was astounded. It took the sultan a very
long time to detach himself from the beauty that surrounded him and to step
outside the cottage.
Having seen what the greatest artists might possibly achieve, he was now
exceptionally curious to see what the Greek painters had created. Reluctantly,
he left the cottage of the Chinese painters and walked across to the other cottage, which was hidden from view by an enormous curtain. He ordered the
curtain to be drawn back and instantly understood the miracle that the Greek
painters had achieved.
Before the sultan stood the decrepit cottage, which in fact no longer seemed old or dilapidated. The mildew and stains of the past had been
patiently and laboriously removed. The artists had scrubbed, polished, and
refi ned the walls to the extent that everything, including the Chinese paintings
in the cottage opposite, was perfectly refl ected onto them, exemplifying their
purity. The work of the Chinese painters, in all its complexity and beauty, was
manifested in the art of the Greek painters’ simplicity and transparency, thus
rendering it unfathomably more glorious.
The sultan could not hide his amazement at how the Greek painters had
managed to re-create beauty in its purest form, creating the perfect state. He
had no doubt which group had the superior artists.
25
The Lover Who Was Nothing
A man, desperately in love, arrived at the house of his beloved and enthusiastically knocked on the door.
“Who’s there?” asked the lady.
“It’s me,” declared the man, full of hope.
“Go away, there’s no place for someone like you in this house!” she
responded, her voice laced with sorrow. “You’re naïve and not yet ready, just
like an uncooked meal! You declare yourself as ‘me’ and still proclaim your
undying love for me? A lover who only sees himself is no lover at all but needs
to roast in the fi re of separation until he’s properly cooked!”
She refused to open the door, and the distraught man eventually backed
away from the house. Soon after, he left the town for an unknown destination
in some faraway land. Burning with the pain of separation, after a year of traveling from place to place he gathered his courage and approached his beloved’s
home once again. Apprehensively but politely, he knocked on the door.
“Who’s knocking at this hour?” asked the lady impatiently.
“No one! The one on this side of the door is also you!” expressed the
man humbly.
“Now that you’ve stopped seeing only yourself, you’ve become me at last!
Two people could never exist in this house simultaneously, but now you may
enter.”
She cautiously opened the door and let her lover inside.
“Now you’re welcome in this house. There’s no difference between us
anymore; no longer are we the rose and the thorn. We are one and the same.”
Spitting at Imam Ali
I
n the early years of Islam in the Arab lands, the newly converted Moslems
waged many wars with others who did not yet believe in Islam, people
widely known as infidels. In one war, Ali, the prophet’s son-in-law, who was
a very competent warrior, came face to face with another capable soldier. Ali
succeeded in bringing his opponent to his knees in a short, sharp fight and
raised his sword to take the man’s life. The proud soldier believed that his end
was imminent, and all he could think to do was take one last spiteful action: he
spat at Ali, right in the face. Ali immediately withdrew his sword and stepped
back, sparing the man’s life.
The subdued warrior was stunned; he had expected the worst and now
was perplexed that he was still alive. He needed an explanation; he needed to
know why Ali had taken pity on him. Before Ali could walk away from their
encounter, the warrior called out to him: “Ali, you had drawn your sword to
finish me off but changed your mind. What made you drop your weapon?
What did you see in me when we fought that made you lose interest and spare
my life? You had the upper hand; you’d won the fight. What else was more
important than finishing me off ? What suppressed your anger at that instant?”
“I only fight for God,” responded Ali. “I’m God’s servant; I’m not in the
business of saving my own skin. I’m God’s unbeatable lion, not a whimsical
warrior of passion! Not words but actions speak for my belief. The sword
might be in my hand, but it is God who strikes. Just like the wind that cannot
move a mountain, I too shall not move other than by God’s will.
“Anger makes most kings lose their heads, but anger is my obedient slave!
It’s indeed my patience that has freed me from the yoke of anger. My sword
does not kill; instead, it bestows life! You spat at me, and thus raised an issue
that did not directly involve God; and I never fight for any reason other than
God. Your spitting aroused my ego and thus sparked off my anger. Had I used
my sword, I would have been fighting half for God and half for my ego! That’s
why I thought it best to withdraw my sword.”
Ali then turned to walk away, without looking back.
MaSNaVi�ii
28
The Snake Catcher and the Thief
A petty thief was feeling supremely fortunate because, earlier that day, he
had succeeded in stealing a massive snake from a snake catcher. Little did
the witless thief know that it had been the snake catcher’s fi rst catch, and even
less was he aware that the snake’s venom was deadly! Meanwhile, the snake
catcher was himself oblivious to his luck in losing the snake, of whose danger
he was himself unaware. Distraught at his loss, though, he schemed about how
to fi nd the thief and retrieve his precious catch, which he had hoped would
fetch him a tidy sum.
Not long afterward, the snake catcher was making his way into town, toying with various plans to catch the thief. All of a sudden, he saw the thief ’s
dead body by the roadside and recognized him instantly.
“It must have been my snake that took his life!” the snake catcher gasped
as he spotted the tracks the snake had left by the side of the corpse as it
wiggled away. “I prayed so hard to fi nd this poor soul and get my catch back,
believing I’d been cheated. Praise to God that my prayers went unheeded.
While I thought I had lost a salable snake, in fact I had gained back my life!”
Many are our wishes and prayers that, beyond our ability to see, will only
bring us loss or death, which God Almighty turns a deaf ear to simply out of
His benevolence.
29
Jesus and the Skeleton
J
esus often traveled from place to place, and various people tended to
accompany him for parts of his journey. On one occasion, as he was leaving a small village, a young man began to follow him. Not long after they had
set out, the young man spotted the bones of some anonymous creature in a
ditch. His curiosity was raised, and, believing that he had discovered an abandoned human skeleton, he started to poke the bones with his stick.
“Are you not the greatest prophet on the face of the earth?” he asked
Jesus. “Then you must know the secret of bringing back the dead!”
Jesus ignored his comment, but the man persisted: “Please, great prophet,
teach me how to give life to these useless bones, so that I too can say that I’ve
accomplished a worthy deed.”
Jesus was annoyed and continued to ignore the young imbecile, but the
man wouldn’t relent and repeated his request again and again. Jesus was beginning to lose patience, and, sure enough, he eventually snapped: “Be quiet, this
is no task for a fool! This work requires a soul purer than rainwater, a self
more sentient than angels. You must live many holy lives before you can even
be considered a candidate for such a job. Let’s just imagine for argument’s
sake that you found a suitable staff, but where now is Moses to achieve the
miracle?” Jesus tried his best to make the simpleton grasp the importance of
the issue.
“All right, since you think that I’m not good enough to know the secret
prayer, then you do it. You give these bones life!” he repeated unrelentingly.
Utterly puzzled, Jesus wondered why this apparently ego-ridden man was
so bent on bringing these dead, forsaken bones back to life. He turned to God,
imploring Him to divulge the reason for this challenge, and soon he heard a
voice in his head:
“The piteous always drive themselves into a rueful state. They plant seeds
but sow thorns. And those who sow thorns have no place in the divine Garden. In their hands, every rose will become a thorn. If they fall in love, their 
30
beloved will turn into a venomous snake, for their spirit is dark and nasty.
Their talent is in creating poison, unlike the true alchemist, who turns everything into precious gold!”
Quite curious by now, Jesus decided to fulfi ll the young man’s demand,
hoping to discover the purpose of this predicament that he found himself
in as well as ridding himself of the fellow’s exasperating company. Thus, he
uttered the prayer to raise the dead and blew it onto the shattered bones.
Unbeknown to Jesus and the young half-wit, the bones were not those
of a man but of a fi erce black lion. In no time, the lion, raised from the dead,
snapped the young man’s head off, broke his arms and legs, and shredded his
body. Standing a few paces away, Jesus witnessed the attack in awe. Cautiously,
he approached the lion: “Why did you tear this poor man apart? He just made
me give you back your life!”
“I decimated his body because he had made you angry, O great prophet!”
said the lion obediently.
“Then why don’t you eat his fl esh?” inquired Jesus.
“It’s not my fate today to be nourished by his body!” replied the grateful
lion, who then turned around and walked toward the distance.
31
The King’s Falcon
The king had a deep love for falcons and was indeed an accomplished
falconer. He kept a separate area of his palace dedicated to his outstanding birds and visited them regularly. One afternoon, after he’d fi nished some
routine business with his advisers, he decided that it was the perfect time to
fl y his favorite falcon. But, alas, when he entered the enclosure he saw that the
bird had escaped!
The falcon, having been reared in the palace all her life and cared for
tenderly by the king himself, had somehow gotten out and lost her way, and
had ended up at an old woman’s cottage. The woman was preparing a pot of
soup for her family when she caught sight of the astounding bird perched on
her wall. She felt sorry for her and grabbed her by the talons, tying them up
with a piece of string so she couldn’t fl y away, and began to stroke her beautiful feathers.
She decided, though, that the bird’s long, unkempt feathers needed pruning, so she cut them as short as she thought appropriate. Then she noticed
the bird’s talons and thought it best to cut them as well, for they seemed not
to have been trimmed for a long while. The entire time she tended to the
poor falcon, she stroked her caringly and whispered to her sympathetically:
“Where have you been, little one, that they’ve treated you so badly? Look how
long your feathers and nails had grown! You should’ve fl own to Mother much
sooner.”
The lost falcon was now trapped for good, unable to fl y or climb away.
Meanwhile, the king and his soldiers had searched the entire county for her
and were returning to the palace empty-handed and downhearted. As they
rode through the last village on their route, all of a sudden, the king caught
sight of his poor falcon, who didn’t look anything like her old, beautiful self
but was still completely familiar to the king. In the midst of the smoke and
dust of the old woman’s poor hut, the bird had lost her glory; the glamour of
the palace had been completely washed away.
Tears welled up in the king’s eyes, and he spoke: “This is your punishment for being ungrateful and forsaking my blessing. Ending up in this 
32
disgusting hut with this old, ignorant woman is what you truly deserve!” The
king reproached his bird while stroking her injured feathers lovingly.
The falcon was shamefaced and looked at her master with utter surrender
and regret. If only she could speak, she would tell the king how sorry she was
for being so naïve and ungrateful. Without words, she begged the king for
forgiveness, admitting that she had taken her noble stature for granted.
With her expressive eyes, she confessed that even though she’d lost her
feathers and talons, she was not unduly distressed because they would eventually grow back; she implored that she would gladly tolerate the pain of her
diminished grandeur in the meantime, because she knew that the king was a
merciful master! If only the king could fi nd it in his heart to forgive her transgression, just this once!
33
The Shaykh and the Tray of Sweets
There was once a famous shaykh who was revered by everyone in the small
town where he lived, but he was always in debt. Renowned for his generosity and selfl essness, he gave away to the poor everything that he was given
by the rich. With the last donation he had received from a wealthy patron,
he built a Sufi House, leaving himself with nothing to spare. He remained
untroubled, though, as his debts had always been paid through the grace of
God—until then! His life’s end was approaching, and he lay in bed contentedly, melting away like a candle, while his creditors gathered around him, sour
faced and desperate, as they had no hope of collecting what was owed to them.
“Look at these untrusting fellows!” he thought as he watched them from
his sickbed. “How could they not trust that God will repay my measly debt?”
In a trice, he heard a child’s voice outside selling sweet halva. The shaykh
ordered his manservant to purchase the entire tray, hoping that perhaps when
the angry creditors ate something sweet they would not glare at him with
such bitterness and disdain. The servant bargained with the child and bought
the whole tray for half a dinar, setting it down before the men. The shaykh
graciously invited them to enjoy it. When the tray was polished clean, the boy
asked for his money.
“How do you expect me to pay you?” the shaykh retorted. “I’m on my
deathbed; go away, leave me in peace!”
Frustrated and overcome with grief at his loss, the boy hurled the empty
tray onto the fl oor, wailing uncontrollably. He cried out, wishing that his legs
had been broken or that instead he had gone to sell his sweets at the bathhouse
rather than at this wretched Sufi House with its freeloading mystics. A crowd
gathered around the boy as his sobs echoed throughout the neighborhood:
“Great shaykh, I assure you that my master will murder me on the spot if
I return empty-handed. How can your conscience permit this injustice?” he
pleaded with the shaykh as he stumbled up to his side.
“What are you conjuring?” protested the creditors at the dying shaykh.
“You’ve already usurped our wealth. How could you now bring such misfortune upon this poor lad?”
34
Impervious to the men’s retorts and pretending to be unaffected by the
weeping boy, the shaykh pulled his quilt over his head and slept soundly. The
boy remained beside him, weeping until the next prayer time, and the shaykh
did not glance at him once.
Why would the full moon, in all its glory, be bothered by the barking of
moonstruck dogs? Does the moon even hear their noise? The beasts do their
job while the moon does its own, spreading light all over the world. All things
on earth and above do their own little task; running water does not lose its
clarity or calm because of the straw and dust that fl oat on its surface! The
king, amused by his entertainers, drinks his wine by the stream until dawn,
unaware of the cacophony of the frogs around.
Had the creditors collectively dug into their pockets to gather the half
dinar that the shaykh owed the boy, they could have easily paid him off. Yet
the will of the shaykh prevented them from exercising their generosity and
the boy from receiving anything at all. Such, and much more, is the power and
mystery of a Sufi .
At the next prayer time, a servant arrived with a covered tray sent by one
of the shaykh’s wealthy admirers who knew that he was unwell and didn’t have
much longer to live. The servant paid his respects and laid the tray before the
shaykh, lifting the cover to expose a small banquet of exquisite sweets. Much
to everyone’s surprise, there lay four hundred dinars in a corner of the tray and
half a dinar separately wrapped in a cloth by their side. The creditors gasped
in awe, unable to fathom how the shaykh had managed to bring about such
a miracle. Instantly they repented, ashamed to have ever doubted his powers,
and begged his forgiveness.
“I forgive you all your doubts,” the shaykh replied. “Go in peace. I asked
God to show me the right way, and thus He did! Although this half dinar is
not worth much, to gain it depended on the tears of the child! Unless the
sweet-seller boy cried his heart out, the doors of benevolence would not be
fl ung open. My brothers, by the child I mean the child in your own eyes! Consider your needs fulfi lled once you shed tears. If you want to be the recipient 
35
of unbounded generosity, make the child in your eyes cry for your earthly
body.”
We cannot judge the behavior of mystics with our simple minds. Unless
we suffer occasionally and express our hopelessness, the doors of grace cannot
be opened to us; as in this case, the boy’s tears were required before the gates
of generosity could be unlatched.
36
The Sufi Who Lost His Donkey
A merchant darvish would travel for several days in a row, trading his goods
in towns and villages that he passed through. One night after a long
journey, he arrived at a remote town on the edge of the desert. As was customary for darvishes, he sought the nearest Sufi House to spend the night.
When he located the establishment, he went directly to the stables to tend
to his exhausted donkey, who had patiently carried the merchandise all day.
He brought him plenty of water and hay, making sure that the animal lacked
nothing for want. Just to be sure of his donkey’s well-being, he tipped the
young stableboy to take extra care of him.
The other darvishes who were staying in the Sufi House were mostly poor
and hungry laborers, their hearts habitually on the verge of sin. When they
realized that the newcomer had a donkey in the stables, they decided to take
advantage of their sudden fortune. Unbeknown to the owner, they quickly
sold the donkey to another guest who was leaving that very same night and
spent the money buying food and candles for the evening.
As they began to prepare their meal, the men became progressively more
agitated, excited that tonight everything was perfectly set for a grand feast.
They extended much courtesy to the donkey’s owner, bowing to him repeatedly and making him feel welcome. Meanwhile, among themselves, they
silently celebrated the fact that they no longer needed to beg for a morsel of
food, nor would they have to fast for lack of resources in the coming days.
The owner, for his part, considered himself lucky to be at the Sufi House that
evening and able to enjoy a tasty meal in the company of great, generous Sufi s.
Little did he know!
Eventually, the food was served, and all enjoyed themselves, eating to their
hearts’ delight. Soon after they fi nished their meal, the men began the sama.
1
The dust rose under their feet, mingling with the smoke from the cooking,
1 Spiritual whirling dance of Sufi s.
37
enveloping the whirlers in a mystic cloud. The Sufi s sang and danced, raising
their arms toward the sky, whirling round and round, stomping their feet then
prostrating on the fl oor, sweeping it clean with their robes. As the sama gathered pace, the musicians picked up the beat and began to sing enthusiastically:
“The ass is gone, the ass is gone!”
Arms in the air, the samazans2
 repeated madly after the musicians: “The
ass is gone, the ass is gone!”
The owner of the donkey, unaware that it was his donkey they were singing about, joined in passionately and sang along with them: “The ass is gone,
the ass is gone!”
The sama continued long into the night, lasting until dawn. At sunrise,
the men left one by one on their separate ways, bidding each other warm farewells. The owner of the donkey wiped the dust off his clothes and gathered
his belongings, getting ready for another working day. Hurrying to catch up
with his newfound darvish friends, he rushed to the stables but did not see
his four-legged companion. He thought that the stableboy must have taken
the animal to the stream to let him drink; perhaps he hadn’t had enough water
the night before. When the young boy fi nally appeared, the owner asked him
about his donkey’s whereabouts. The boy was confounded and told him that
he had no idea what he was talking about. The owner became furious and
grabbed him by the throat, threatening him with his life.
“I left my donkey in your care last night,” he screamed. “You were meant
to look after him. Don’t you dare give me excuses; quickly go and bring him
to me—otherwise, I shall take you directly to the authorities!” he threatened.
“I was overpowered by the darvishes,” confessed the boy. “I feared for
my life! They sold your donkey and used the money to purchase the feast last
night. To leave a loaf of bread with a group of hungry men is like throwing a
scrawny cat to a pack of wild dogs!” he exclaimed, trying to view the situation
philosophically.
“Supposing they took him from you by force, shouldn’t you have informed
me that they were stealing my donkey? If you had, I could have at least bought
2 Sufi whirlers.
38
him back from the buyer or got the money out of this unruly lot. Now that
they’ve each gone their separate ways, how am I ever going to fi nd them? What
an irreparable injustice you’ve brought upon me!” he whimpered.
“I tried to warn you several times, I swear to God, but your enthusiasm
was greater than all of theirs put together!” retorted the stableboy. “You sang
even louder than the rest: ‘The ass is gone, the ass is gone!’ I thought for sure
you must have given them your consent, being a mystic and privy to so many
secrets!”
“I was excited, aroused by their enthusiasm,” agreed the darvish. “But I
was foolish to imitate them. Imitation has destroyed me! I curse it a thousand
times, for it has damaged me beyond repair!”
39
The Man Who Killed His Mother
I
n one of the poor neighborhoods of town, a woman had been sleeping
with every man who approached her. One day, her son, who could no longer bear the shame, stormed into her bedroom. He attacked her with his dagger, stabbing her repeatedly, making sure that she was dead.
His will was resolute, and he kept his head up as he staggered out of the
house, his clothes stained with her blood. He walked purposelessly along the
back streets of the neighborhood for several hours until a friend chanced upon
him and soon heard his confession.
“But, my friend, why did you kill her? I don’t understand,” the friend asked
him, completely perplexed.
“She was a prostitute and shamed me every day!” blurted out the young
man, angry that his friend had not understood his pure intention and was now
questioning him.
“Why didn’t you kill her lovers? Why kill her ?” repeated the confused
friend.
“I would’ve had to kill a man a day!” rationalized the troubled man. “This
way her shame is buried with her for all time, and I don’t ever have to commit
another murder.”
40
Sound of the Splash
I
t had taken the villagers a long time and had cost them a fortune, but they
reasoned that it had been necessary to build a wall to protect their water
supply from possible theft by their neighbors in the next village. One hot summer day, a man was passing through the area, but his thirst overwhelmed him.
As he staggered slowly along the wall, taking advantage of the little shade it
provided, he hoped to fi nd a way to the stream to sate his thirst.
The sound of the running water was unmistakable, and soon the poor,
thirsty man was unable to take another step. He spent his last remaining
strength to climb the wall to at least catch a glimpse of the running water on
the other side. When he reached the top, he instinctively scooped up a handful
of mud from the wall and tossed it into the stream. The sound of the splash
was music to his ears, and his heart was lifted out of its desperate gloom. He
was thus encouraged to continue scooping out more mud and chucking it into
the water, just to hear the melodious sound of the splash. As he listened to
the music of the water, a question arose in his mind: “What do you hope to
achieve by throwing mud into the stream?”
“For a thirsty man, the sound of the splash is like the music that raises the
dead on Judgment Day!” he replied to no one in particular. “It also reminds
me of the sound of thunder, which announces the arrival of rain to a scorched
garden; or the gracefulness of alms to the darvish; or even a prisoner’s hope
for freedom.”
Almost forgetting his thirst, the man continued to fl ip mud into the
stream, enjoying the enchanting sound of the splash.
“Oh, and there’s something else that’s just as important!” he seemed to
remember. “I’m no engineer, but I can see that with every handful that I dig,
the wall gets lower, allowing me to get closer to the water! Slowly but surely,
this tall, sturdy wall is going down, and in no time, I’ll be only a stone’s throw
away from the object of my desire, namely that stream of fresh, running water,
which is my life!”
41
Thorny Shrubs
I
n the past, desert towns and villages were connected by long and circuitous
dirt roads. In one such village, there lived a vicious man who cared for no
one, not even for his immediate family. He seemed to be always in confl ict,
mostly with himself; one could gauge his mood simply by watching whether
he was involved in some vindictive activity.
For some time, this man had been planting small, thorny shrubs along
the road from his village to the next. These bushes grew slowly but sturdily
and scratched against the feet and legs of whoever walked on the path, turning
their journey into absolute torture. Every day, he planted new shrubs despite
the complaints of other townsfolk; he offhandedly turned a deaf ear to the
village headman’s order to stop his spiteful planting.
Although he regularly promised to pull out the thornbushes, he never
complied, and they grew sturdier and thicker, cutting the skin of people using
the footpath and causing bleeding infections. At last, the selfi sh man was
called to court.
“I’ve asked you many times to stop your unreasonable planting,” gushed
the headman. “Why do you insist on hurting everyone around you? Every
day you break your promise to pull out the thornbushes, you lazy good-fornothing! I’ve ordered you to pull out the nasty plants but instead you leave
them to grow, further strengthening their roots; and you add more every single
day! You grow older and weaker each day as they grow stronger and taller.
Either you cut them from the roots this very morning or turn them all into
rose bushes! Tell me, can you do that?”
The headman had legally challenged the scoffl aw at last, but he didn’t
have much hope, nearly certain that his words would have little impact. He
knew that it was probably too late for this damaged soul to change his deeply
ingrained ways, and he watched the man in despair as he left the courtroom in
a careless clamor, plainly indicating with his disregard that he had no intention
of heeding the court order.
42
Zolnoun in the Hospital
The great Egyptian Sufi Zolnoun had apparently gone insane. His
unbounded excitability had become disturbing to everyone close to
him. Yet his devotees were tolerant and put up with his increasingly unbearable behavior, until it reached a point that he truly became quite insufferable.
When his fi ery madness became contagious and affected the behavior of the
citizens he regularly came across, it became evident to his friends and devotees
that Zolnoun had to be admitted to a sanatorium.
Although, truthfully, the great Sufi could have easily controlled and
repressed his impulsive behavior and avoided being taken forcefully to a
prison-like hospital, he refused to submit to the will of those around him,
who simply did not possess his depth of insight. Zolnoun, who had literally
been driven to insanity by the sheer number of people who surrounded him
at all times, was in fact thrilled to fi nd peace and quiet at last in the hospital.
He spent his days silently reading and studying his favorite texts, happy to be
left to his own devices. However, his peaceful state did not last long, and soon
those of his followers who considered themselves his close friends and companions could not bear his absence any longer and decided to pay him a visit.
Zolnoun was sitting peacefully in the garden of the sanatorium reading
when he saw these men he knew approaching. In the blink of an eye, the calm
and composed Zolnoun of the past weeks was transformed into a screaming
and cursing madman. His friends were not at fi rst too concerned, as they
believed they’d already seen him in this insane state and thought nothing of it.
The old Sufi , however, noticed that his usual ranting was no longer working and decided to test his so-called friends even further. He began to run
around the garden spitting and cursing, gathering up rocks and sticks and
hurling them at the men. At fi rst they thought that this frantic behavior could
not continue for long, but they soon discovered that Zolnoun, although feeble
looking, was indeed stronger and more energetic than even they, who were still
young men.
43
It didn’t take long for Zolnoun to achieve his purpose, which was ultimately to scare the men and drive them off the grounds of the sanatorium.
He laughed out loud as he watched the men hurry to save themselves from
the projectiles he’d thrown at them. Waving his arms frantically about him,
he screamed after them: “I spit on you and your so-called friendship! A true
friend tolerates any kind of behavior; he doesn’t give up on you after only a
few foul words and some stone throwing! How could anyone consider the
likes of you to be friends? Be gone and good riddance to you all!”
Once alone again, Zolnoun sat quietly on his favorite bench in the garden
of the sanatorium, reading his favorite treatises on friendship.
44
Loghman and His Master
I
n ancient times, wealthy people owned slaves, and Loghman belonged to a
kind and loving master. The master had witnessed his devoted slave perform
his duties without fail and with total honesty and loyalty through the years. He
was as devoted to Loghman as the slave was devoted to him, to such an extent
that the master thought he might even love his slave more than his own children.
Although Loghman was only a slave, he had many qualities of a highly
spiritual person. His master was so fond of him that he refused to touch any
food before allowing Loghman to taste it fi rst. If the slave didn’t eat what
was offered to him, the master would throw the food away without touching
it. One day, an acquaintance brought a gift of rare melons from his farm. It
was the end of the summer but still hot, and Loghman decided to submerge
a couple of the melons in a shallow pool to cool them before serving them to
his master that afternoon.
The day had cooled down a little, and the master had awoken from
his afternoon nap when Loghman quickly brought the cool melons for his
delight. The master chose a long knife and cut a thin slice of the fruit, but as
usual before tasting it he fi rst offered it to his favorite slave. Loghman took the
melon and gratefully bit into it, and in no time he fi nished it delectably. When
the master saw how much he had enjoyed the fi rst slice, he cut him another.
Loghman ate the second slice with such craving that his master continued to
give him more and more. Finally, there was only one last slice left, and the
master thought he’d better taste it himself.
With great pleasure, the master took a bite of the delicious-looking
melon, but before he could even begin to chew his mouth was on fi re! The
melon was so bitter that the master’s mouth was immediately covered in
blisters such that he could hardly breathe. It took over an hour for him to
regain his composure and speak: “My dear man, how could you eat the
entire melon, which was as bitter as poison, and smile at me with such joy in 
45
your eyes? Are you your own worst enemy?” he asked with great compassion
in his words.
“My revered master, all my life you’ve fed me the most delectable foods.
I was too ashamed to complain, as it was the fi rst time that you’d given me
something unpalatable. The reason for my whole existence is your benevolence; how could I possibly complain about one instance of being served inedible food?”
46
Moses and the Shepherd
I
t was almost sundown, and the heat of the day was abating. The shepherd
had gathered his herd of goats and was heading home. A soft, cool breeze
had begun to blow, making the thought of the imminent night even more delicious. The shepherd was in a good mood and was lovingly praising his beloved
God, unaware that the prophet Moses was within earshot:
“Where are You, my one and only Beloved, so that I may serve You without fail, mend Your shoes when they’re torn, comb Your locks when they’re
untidy, wash Your clothes when they’re soiled, and pick the lice out of Your
disheveled hair? My magnifi cent Beloved, I promise to always kiss Your hands
with utter respect, bring You fresh milk every day, and rub Your tired feet
when they’re painfully sore. When it’s time to sleep, I’ll make Your bed and
sweep Your room spotless. My life’s Yours to do with as You wish; my goats,
my entire livelihood, all belong to You, for You’re my one and only Love.”
Moses patiently listened to the shepherd’s blasphemous litany until he
fi nally fell silent. Gravely he stepped forward and asked the simple shepherd
with authority: “Who were you speaking to?”
“The One who created you and me, the earth and the sky,” replied the
shepherd innocently, not recognizing Moses.
Moses could not hold back his anger and exclaimed in horror: “You
miserable, pitiful man! What’s this nonsense you’re spitting out? I’m Moses,
your prophet, and I’m telling you to shut your disdainful mouth this instant.
The Creator has no worldly limbs; shoes are for those who need them, milk is
for someone who’s still growing! Your praise makes no sense, so stop it before
your life is forever cursed!”
Astounded and ashamed, the shepherd sighed: “Oh, Moses, you’ve sewn
my lips together! I repent and wish that my life could be set on eternal fi re
this very minute!”
He then stood up, ripped open his shirt, threw it to the wind, and sobbed
desperately into the desert. Soon after this encounter, Moses felt a heavy 
47
slumber descend upon him, sending him into a deep sleep, where he had a
revelation:
“Moses, what have you done?” Moses immediately recognized the undeniable sound of God’s voice. “You’ve alienated my faithful servant from me!
Did I send you as my prophet to unite me with my people or to sever me from
them? I’ve allowed everyone their own way of worshipping, their own form of
expression. I have no need of their prayers, but they do. What may seem like
poison to you could be honey to someone else. I don’t look at what my people
say outwardly, I only see what’s inside their hearts. I want to see the burning
of love! So light up the fi re of love in your soul and banish your unhelpful
thoughts once and for all!”
Hearing God’s words, the treacle of His wisdom was implanted in
Moses’s soul, opening his eyes to secrets unknown to him before and convincing him to always look beyond the superfi cial. A few moments later, he was
heading into the desert on the trail of the shepherd, agonizing over his harsh
and unkind words to the poor man. It didn’t take long to fi nd the shepherd’s
footsteps, for they were distinctly different from an ordinary man’s. In places
he’d been dragging his feet, and soon after that he’d been limping, then sidestepping and stepping backward, even crawling at times, all indicative of his
tumultuous state of mind. In due time, Moses spotted the shepherd in the
distance and carefully approached him, speaking softly:
“My dear shepherd, you’ve been blessed by God Almighty himself! He
has reproached me for speaking to you so abrasively. He wants you to pray in
any way you prefer. In fact, God adores your simple words that come directly
from your heart. You may continue in the same manner that you’ve always
prayed, and God wants you to know that He’s absolutely content with you.”
The shepherd raised his face to Moses. He was not the same man anymore; his eyes did not belong to this world, and his voice rose from a more
profound depth.
“Moses, I’ve gone beyond your hollow words; I’m mad in my soul. I’ve
traveled past the earth and the sky, a thousand years beyond! You brought 
48
down your whip on my very being, hurling me into worlds beyond my dreams.
Praise be to your whipping arm, which laid such a blow and roused me to my
own truth. I can’t explain who or what I am anymore; all I know is that I’m
sailing away, but where to, I cannot tell.”
The shepherd said goodbye respectfully, turned his back to Moses, and
staggered away, traveling deeper into the desert until he became invisible.
49
Friendship with a Bear
The mountains in the northern part of Persia were rampant with large
brown bears who roamed the vast region and hardly ever had to defend
themselves against any predators. There was, however, one extraordinary beast
that the locals had never set eyes upon called a dragon, which could easily kill
and devour the bears.
A hunter from the central part of the country went to the mountains in
the north in search of prey, but he knew nothing about the legendary dragon.
As he pitched his tent and prepared a fi re to keep himself warm overnight, he
hummed his favorite melody, excited about his anticipated morning hunt. All
of a sudden, he heard the excruciating cry of a beast and the piercing roar of
some other creature that he had never heard before. His curiosity was aroused,
and he picked up his bow and arrow and swiftly but carefully approached the
scene of the fi ght.
Right there before him was the elusive dragon with fi re coming out of his
mouth as he fl ashed his huge sharp teeth at an enormous bear, the latter standing on his hind legs preparing for the imminent fi ght. The hunter wasted no
time, aiming straight between the dragon’s eyes and shooting him on the spot.
Down fell the dragon with the most hideous sound thundering from his fi ery
mouth. The bear, looking upon the scene in disbelief, was stunned. He turned
to the hunter and gazed at him for a while before lowering himself onto all
fours and slowly swaggering over to him.
At fi rst, the hunter was alarmed that the bear might attack him, but his
fears were eased as the huge animal sat before his savior’s feet, resting his head
on his paws. It seemed to the hunter that the animal was demonstrating gratitude in his own way, and he was relieved. As he turned around to walk back to
his tent, the bear got up and quietly began to follow him.
From that day on, the bear never left the hunter’s side, and the hunter
gradually became accustomed to his presence. The two became odd companions, much to the surprise of everyone who saw them together. Often, people 
50
would warn the hunter that to befriend an ignorant beast was dangerous, even
worse than making friends with a human enemy. The hunter, though, never
heeded their advice, believing that his advisers were all jealous of his friendship with the glorious bear. Soon, everyone stopped giving him advice, leaving
the hunter to his own devices.
One glorious morning, the huntsman decided to take advantage of the
good weather and go hunting. The two companions traversed a variety of
mountain paths in search of a worthy prey, but they were unlucky and still
empty-handed after many hours of aimless pursuit. The hunter grew weary
and decided to take a short nap in the shade of a tree. The bear had learned
to obediently sit by his side and guard him and his bow and arrows until he
awoke.
As the hunter slept deeply, dreaming of beautiful long summer days, a
fl y began to circle above his head, buzzing noisily. The hunter waved at the
fl y in his sleep, tossing and turning, but the fl y would not relent. The bear,
whose one and only aim in life had become the constant care of his mastercompanion, couldn’t succeed in waving off the fl y either, and he became
frustrated and impatient. The fl y’s incessant buzzing would not quiet down,
adding to the bear’s exasperation. In one great swoop the bear fi nally picked
up the nearest rock that he could hold in his front paws and, as the fl y alit on
the hunter’s forehead, slammed it onto the insect, crushing the hunter’s skull
along with the fl y in one swift motion.
Such is the result of keeping company with the ignorant, albeit with the
best of intentions.
51
Two Different Birds Flying Together
A physician regularly walked home through a fi eld every evening after he
had fi nished his house calls. His home lay underneath the path of migratory birds who spanned the sky while they fl ew to their respective destinations.
He loved birds and often watched them closely when they fl ew overhead, trying always to observe their migrations.
Late one afternoon, the physician was tired after a long day but insisted
on walking home rather than accepting a ride from a patient’s son. As he
strolled through the green countryside, he caught sight of two birds who
were fl ying rather low, as if separated from their fl ock. They looked unusual,
not the common birds who normally fl ew overhead at this time of year. He
became curious and focused closely on this pair of birds.
They looked odd fl ying together for sure, because they were two different breeds! The physician had never seen anything like it and, after positively
identifying the species, thought the matter through. He wondered to himself,
how is it possible for the heavenly goshawk to fl y with the earthbound owl?
Why would a bird who belongs in Paradise accompany a bird who essentially
belongs among the ruins of the earth?
Soon, the birds began to descend, preparing to land not far from where
the physician had stopped to watch them. As they landed and began to hop
toward what might have been a cluster of worms on the ground, the physician
noticed that both birds were limping!
He had wondered how it was possible for two completely dissimilar birds
to become companions, and now he had his answer: they were both lame in
one leg, and that had become their binding factor! The poor goshawk, having
suffered what appeared to have been a nearly fatal injury, had stooped to the
level of the graveyard owl, abandoning his former majesty.
52
The Prophet Visits a Sick Man
An old acquaintance of the prophet Mohammad was taken ill. Unable to
eat, he had lost a great deal of weight and become an invalid. When the
prophet heard about his old friend’s pitiful state, he decided to pay him a visit.
As he walked into the sick man’s room, he realized that the old man’s days were
numbered and that in fact he was nearing his end quite rapidly. Thus, he paid
his friend much attention and tried to soothe his pain with kind words. The
old man was so thrilled and grateful to see the prophet sitting beside him that
he felt like he’d been gifted a new lease on life.
“My illness has brought me this unbelievable fortune!” he uttered feebly.
“The prophet himself has come to pay me a visit! What an auspicious morning! How grateful I am for all my pains and aches, for they have brought the
prophet to my side! God has bestowed me my wish in my old age. He has
given me such a backache that I can’t sleep at night from the pain, but this is
no torture; it’s in fact my treasure! My prayers have been answered before my
death.”
The prophet was puzzled when he heard the old man praying for pain.
“Old friend, from your words I can tell that you have been praying erroneously. You may have thought that you’re asking God for sweet kindnesses,
but in fact your wrong words have brought you much misfortune! It sounds
like, instead of praying for a long, healthy life you’ve been begging for poisoned meals. Which prayer did you utter?”
“I can hardly remember, I’m in such agony,” moaned the poor man. “But
wait, being in your presence, my mind’s beginning to clear a bit,” he said
weakly. “I felt guilty for many sins I’d committed and was frightened of God’s
punishment. I had no patience and felt unworthy to even begin to repent.
Like a drowning man, I reached out to anything I could grab to keep afl oat.
I prayed that He would infl ict all the tortures of hell upon me while I’m still
alive so that once I pass into the next world I can fi nally fi nd peace. Now I’m
riddled with such pain and suffering that I can’t even remember any prayers,
let alone what my sins were! Your kind visit has meant a great deal to me, and 
53
your words of comfort have brought me much joy. I thank you from the bottom of my heart.”
The prophet looked at the man with great sorrow: “Be aware, and never
again repeat such a prayer! Why would you want to cut off your roots with
your own hands? You’re no more than a minuscule, weak ant scurrying across
the great scheme of life. Why would you invite the weight of a mountain to
crush your back?” retorted the prophet.
“I repent, great prophet; I will never try to outsmart anyone again.”
“When you pray to God, ask for an easier life to endure, not one that’s
more diffi cult than you can bear. Ask God for only goodness in this life, and in
the next! Ask that your path cross through gardens lush with fl owers guiding
your way back to Allah, who should be your ultimate destination.”
The prophet took leave after a few more minutes, knowing that the old
man did not have much longer to live and wishing him a departure to a world
that would be easier than the one he had conjured for himself on earth.
54
The Clown and the Prostitute
A member of the ruling family of the town of Termez had befriended a
clown many years earlier. The two men had a compatible relationship,
untarnished by the years. The clown made the older man laugh every time they
saw each other, and the wealthy man in turn made sure that the clown was well
provided for.
One day when they were alone, the older man, who had heard that the
clown had recently got married to a woman of low standing and was baffl ed by
this turn of events, asked him: “My old friend, there are many well-respected
women in our community whom I know personally. Why didn’t you tell me
to ask for the hand of one of them for you? Why did you rush into such an
important decision and marry a disreputable woman?”
“Sir, you must know that I have already married nine reputable women!”
he said to his caring companion, trying not to grin too widely. “You may have
also noticed that not a single one of them remained faithful to me, and I had
to divorce every single one! My heart was shattered each time, and I couldn’t
tolerate another cheating wife. So I decided to marry an already disgraced
woman, without even knowing her, and take a chance on life. I’ve already tried
my luck using my mind and my reasoning power; this time I’m trying out
madness instead!”
55
The Wise Madman
A young man had determined that it was time to get married, but he was
not entirely sure about his decision. Because he did not wish to make
a grave mistake, knowing that the choice of a bride was probably the most
important decision of one’s life, he decided to consult with someone wiser
than himself. He searched the entire town and asked everyone he knew until
fi nally someone told him: “In our town, there’s only one wise person, and he’s
the old man who plays with children!”
It didn’t take long to fi nd the wise man; in fact, it would be hard to miss
him. There, in the middle of the town’s main square, he spent his days chasing a group of young children while riding a long bamboo stick, pretending
that it was his wild and unruly horse. When the young man spotted him from
a distance, he took note that he’d better approach the man carefully. “Hello,
great horseman, would you please veer your horse toward me for a minute?”
he implored desperately.
“Be swift and state your business,” the man replied in a formal tone. “As
you can see, my horse is wild and fi erce and will kick you if you make a silly
move,” he warned.
“I wish to get married but am inexperienced and need advice. What can
you tell me about women? Which woman would be the best choice for me?” he
asked humbly, not sure if he was actually going to get a decent answer.
“There are three kinds of women in the world,” replied the horseman
knowledgeably. “Two are great treasures indeed, but the third kind is the
greatest of treasures both in this world and the next.”
The young man was grateful but confused. “Would you mind expounding on your theories?” he asked politely.
“I will start with the fi rst type, who will be entirely yours all your life;
while the second type of woman will be yours only partially; and the third
type will not belong to you at all! Now, move away before my horse kicks your
shin and lames you,” declared the old man as he turned his bamboo horse
toward the children and began to gallop away.
56
“Please wait,” implored the young man, still confounded. “Now that
you’ve shared your invaluable wisdom, please tell me, what do you mean
exactly?”
The horseman pulled his bridle and turned to face the inquirer. “All
right, let me tell you clearly once and for all. The woman whose heart will be
yours but only halfway is the widow. Although childless, she’ll always hold
onto the fond memories of her late husband. There’s another type of woman
who will never share her heart with you, and she’s the widow with children.
Every time she looks at them, she’ll be reminded of the love she shared with
their father. Undoubtedly the best woman of all, whose heart will be yours
forever, is the woman who has never shared it with anyone before you. Now
get out of my way before my horse knocks you out.”
“Dear old man, I have one last question to ask. May I?”
“Go on then,” he replied, a little annoyed.
“Your wisdom is unrivalled; why do you pretend to madness?”
“The townsmen wished to select me as their supreme judge, but I refused
time and time again,” he confessed. “Nevertheless, they insisted that there was
no other wise man in town whom they could trust. They wouldn’t leave me
alone; therefore, I had no choice but to pretend that I’d lost my mind. Inside,
though, I’m still the same. My mind is my spiritual treasure, and I’ll never
share it with the common folk!”
Having imparted his precious secret, the wise madman rode toward the
gang of boys, who were impatient to continue their unfi nished battle.
57
The Night Watchmen and the Drunk
I
t was past midnight, and the night watchmen were patrolling the neighborhood when they came across a drunk leaning up against a wall. One of
them walked up to the man, patted him on the shoulder, and screamed in his
ear: “Hey! Are you drunk? Tell me, quick, what have you been drinking?”
“Whatever was in that bottle over there,” the drunk said, pointing to an
empty bottle that had rolled away to the side.
“What was in the bottle? You know that alcohol is illegal in this town,”
yelled the watchman again.
“I drank what was in the bottle, offi cer,” replied the drunk, slurring his
words.
“I don’t see anything in the bottle; tell me, quickly, what did you drink?”
“What was in the bottle, I told you.”
The watchman realized that he was chasing his own tail and that conversation with this man would be useless. He decided that if he wanted to arrest
the drunkard, he must try another approach.
“Open your mouth and say ah,” he ordered the drunk, by now half asleep,
hoping to smell the alcohol on his breath.
“Hu!” 3
 sighed the drunken man happily.
“I ordered you to say ah and you blurt out Hu?” snapped the angry guard.
“I’m ecstatic, why should I say ah? Ah is a sound for sad people like you
who’ve allowed their backs to get bent in two. People like me are always happy,
and that’s where my Hu comes from!”
“Don’t try to get out of this mess with your stupid rhetoric. I’m not
buying any of your false spirituality. No more arguing; stand up!” he ordered
with authority, knowing well that if he didn’t act fast he would soon be
outmaneuvered.
“That’s all right, you can go now; I’m done here,” said the drunk.
“I told you to get up! You’re drunk, and I must take you in.”
“Leave me alone. How do you expect to steal the clothing off a naked
3 Hu is one of the ninety-nine names for Allah.
58
man?” reasoned the drunk. “If I’d any strength, I’d walk to my own home and
not waste my time arguing with you! If I could reason like the wise, I’d be sitting in my shop doing business, you fool!”
The drunk squatted, leaning his back against the wall, and closed his eyes,
instantly falling asleep. Seeing the hopelessness of this arrest, the night watchmen, exasperated, walked off and left him alone.
59
A Thief at Hand
I
n the middle of the night, a man heard footsteps in his home and quickly
got out of bed to investigate. Sure enough, in his sitting room there stood a
thief, his hands fi lled with valuable objects. Taking fright, the burglar dropped
everything he had gathered and jumped out the window onto the street, while
the owner of the house gave chase. The owner, who was young and a fast runner,
scurried after the thief for a few blocks in the darkness until the thief could run
no more. The owner grabbed him by the scruff of his neck and was about to
drag him to the police station when he heard someone calling out to him.
“Come quickly, come and see the signs left by the thief who’s ravaged
your home!” screamed the unknown voice.
“What a kind and concerned citizen,” thought the owner. “What if there’s a
second thief in my home who might hurt my wife and children? That damage can
never be undone! What good would it do me if I tie up this man but lose the true
culprit? If I don’t listen to this stranger, I might regret it for a long time to come.”
The owner quickly let go of the thief he had caught and rushed back
home. Outside the house walls, in the dark, there stood the thief ’s partner
waiting for the owner to come back.
“Thank you,” gasped the owner when he saw the second thief. “You’ve
done me a great service! Tell me, why were you calling me?”
“Let me show you the footprints of the thief; the bastard has run away in
that direction,” he said, pointing to his right. “If you chase him right away you
might still be able to catch him.”
“You idiot! What on earth are you talking about? I already had caught
him! You tricked me into letting him go. I had the truth in my grip and you are
now suggesting that I look for signs?”
“I’m well aware of the truth,” said the second thief, feigning innocence.
“I’m only trying to show you the signs of the truth!”
60
“You’re certainly either a burglar yourself or a total ignoramus! No, I’m
certain that in fact you are a thief and know exactly what the other chap was
up to. My enemy was in my hands and you made me set him free, and now
you’re blabbering about the truth?”
Sometimes, the truth is much too obvious; people erroneously search for
its signs while the real thing is staring them right in the face.
61
Four Indians in Prayer
The sun was at its zenith, and four devout Indian Moslems entered a
mosque to perform the noon prayer. As they stood shoulder to shoulder,
each with a different hope in his heart, they began to pray. Halfway through
their prayer, the sound of the muezzin rose in the air, casting doubt in their
minds whether they had been too hasty in beginning to pray. One of the four
men turned to the muezzin caller and asked him: “Dear public crier, are you
sure you’re not late today calling out the muezzin?”
One of the Indians was quick to address his friend: “My dear fellow,
what have you done? You spoke in the midst of praying, and now your prayer
is annulled!”
The third Indian turned to the second and exclaimed: “Hey, why do you
blame him? You did exactly the same and have now broken your own prayer!”
“Thank God I didn’t blurt out needlessly like these three!” declared the
fourth Indian. “I’m too clever to commit such stupid mistakes! My prayer is
still valid!” he boasted, unaware of his own equally damaging shortfall.
Such was the manner in which the prayers of all four men, who had tried
to outdo each other in their judgments, were annulled that day.
62
Setting an Example
The Oghuz Turkmens were wild and fi erce warriors who had invaded
Persia and continued to ravage the lands in the northern parts of the
country. Their army eventually arrived at a remote village with the full intention of massacring its inhabitants, pillaging their possessions, and then leveling the entire place.
As they rummaged through the tiny, dilapidated huts, they found two
elderly men, one of whom was the head of the village and the other his
neighbor. The Turkmens hurriedly bound one of the men, intending to
slaughter him.
“Great warriors of our time, why would you want to kill a poor old man
like me?” implored the destitute man. “Why spill my innocent blood? Don’t
you see that I’m so impoverished that I’m practically naked to the bone? What
possible good could my death bring you?” he pleaded as the warriors began to
bind his hands and feet.
“We’ll slit your throat and set an example so that the other man tells us
where he’s buried his gold,” replied a soldier.
“What gold? He’s even poorer than me!”
“We have informers who have guaranteed that he’s hiding his treasure.”
“We are both in the same situation, so why don’t you kill him instead of
me, and I promise to show you where I’m hiding my gold!” reasoned the old
man, cleverly trying to avoid certain death.
63
The Old Man and the Physician
A man had been suffering for a long time from a variety of ailments, as one
does in old age. One day, he fi nally managed to drag himself to his local
doctor to seek help. He did not have much confi dence in doctors and their
advice, but he was at his wit’s end and could no longer tolerate the pain that
had spread throughout his frail body.
“I’m suffering mostly from loss of memory, dear doctor,” he began his
complaints feebly.
“Loss of memory is a result of aging, my dear man,” decreed the young
physician.
“I’m losing my sight rapidly. What can I do?” he continued.
“Loss of sight is from aging,” replied the doctor.
“My backache is debilitating,” moaned the old man.
“Back pain is also the result of old age, my good man,” said the doctor
coldly.
“Nothing I eat seems to taste pleasant anymore,” complained the old
patient.
“Weakness of the stomach also comes with old age.”
“When I breathe, I don’t seem to get enough oxygen in my lungs,” he
carried on.
“Shortness of breath is also from aging,” declared the young doctor as
a matter of fact. “Old age brings with it a host of pains, my ancient friend.”
The old man, who had kept his anger at bay until then, fi nally lost his
temper and snapped: “You idiot! Is this all you’ve learned from years of studying medicine? Haven’t you learned that for every aliment, God has created a
cure? You’re an imbecile who has learned nothing!”
The cool doctor was annoyed but fi rmly responded to the old man’s
insults: “You’re sixty years old, and this anger and fury is also the result of
aging! With the passage of time, the body’s organs begin to deteriorate and 
64
leave one with little tolerance for controlling one’s patience or fury. Therefore,
I will pretend that I have heard nothing of your insults,” retorted the doctor,
brushing aside the old man’s angry remarks.
Having lost the opportunity to tap into a little compassion in his heart,
the young doctor never saw the old man in his surgery again.
65
Juhi at the Funeral
The young Juhi was accompanying his father to a colleague’s funeral. The
dead man’s son led the procession, walking in front of the casket while
shedding tears and crying out in delirious grief after his cherished father:
“My darling father, where are they taking you? Are they going to bury
your adored body in a grave and cover it with heaps of earth? Are they taking
you to a dark and narrow house, with no carpets to cover the fl oors, not even a
straw mat? Will they lay you down in a house where no light ever shines, where
no bread gets baked? Will they leave you behind in a place where no aroma of
cooking ever rises in the air, a house with no proper door at its entrance, no
staircase to its rooftop? Will they lay you down somewhere where there is no
neighbor to knock on your door to ask about you? How could you, who were
so widely revered and respected, ever tolerate such a dark and harsh home?”
When Juhi heard the young man utter these words as he mourned his
father’s demise, he turned to his own father and asked sheepishly: “Father, are
they taking the corpse to our house?”
“Don’t be an idiot! What a stupid question!”
“But father, all the details that the young man is describing point to our
house. Listen to him carefully and you’ll see what I mean. He says that the
house has no light and that no food ever gets cooked there; its door is broken,
and it has no garden or even a rooftop! That’s what our house is like!” insisted
the young Juhi, but his words went unheeded by his unmindful father.
66
A Sackful of Pebbles
I
n the Arabian deserts, merchants used to travel on camels, carrying goods
from one town to another, usually in large caravans. One day, a merchant
was traveling with one such caravan when he came across a learned man, who
approached him.
“Greetings, my good man, where are you coming from and where are you
headed?” the learned man asked.
The merchant responded to the stranger candidly, whereupon he was
asked about the load he was carrying.
“I’ve got one sack fi lled with wheat and the other with pebbles,” he said
proudly.
“Why pebbles?”
“For balance, of course. Why else?”
“Why don’t you fi ll the other sack with half of the wheat rather than
burden your camel with pebbles? This way, the poor beast’s load will be half
as heavy.”
“Well done, my good man,” exclaimed the merchant with surprise. “What
a brilliant idea! Now tell me, being as clever as you are, instead of riding on
a horse or a camel, why are you walking this rough route, torturing yourself ?
The merchant dismounted from his camel to offer the wise man a ride, as
he felt sorry for him, but fi rst he thought to ask him a few personal questions.
“So, tell me, being so wise, would you happen to be a governor or a
minister?”
“Oh no, I’m neither a governor nor a minister. Just take a look at my
clothes! I’m no one, just one of the common folk.”
“But you must own a few camels and cows at least, being as clever as you
are.”
“No cows nor any camels.”
“You must own a shop then. What do you sell?”
“I own no shop nor have any goods to sell.”
67
“But you’re an insightful and intelligent man; in fact, you’re probably an
alchemist who can turn base metals into gold. Your knowledge is invaluable.
Be honest, tell me the truth, how much money have you got on you?”
“My dear fellow, I haven’t got a bean in the world. I walk barefoot and
suffer constantly from hunger, hoping to come across people who might take
pity on me and offer me a slice of dry bread,” confessed the wise man. “My
intelligence and insight have only brought me trouble and suffering.”
“Go away!” screamed the merchant suddenly. “Get out of my sight before
your cursed intelligence rubs off on me, too. Your knowledge will only bear
disaster for anyone you encounter, so get going before I kick you unconscious!
I’ll keep my sacks as they are, thank you very much. I’d much rather carry a
sackful of pebbles than listen to your miserable, useless advice. If you could
benefi t from your own knowledge, you already would have done so. So, go on
and get lost, you miserable creature.”
The merchant quickly mounted his camel, whipped and kicked her
mightily, and urged her to speed away as quickly as possible from the supposedly wise man.
68
God Will Not Punish Me
One day as Jethro, Moses’s father-in-law, was busy with his daily chores,
a friend he had not seen for a long time stopped by to have a cup of
tea. As they spoke about this and that, the man began to boast about his luck.
“I’ve committed countless sins in my life, but God never punishes me,
because He’s benevolent!” he said proudly.
Jethro was baffl ed and wondered why his friend had told him what he
had. Not long after, he had a revelation in which God spoke to him:
“Tell this unknowing man to stop claiming that I have not punished him
for his sins. It’s indeed the opposite! I have grabbed him and held him in my
hands many times, but he was completely incognizant of it. Tell him that he’s
become so tainted inside and out, like a blackened pot, that darkness no longer
has any effect on him. Patches of dirt are immediately apparent on a clean surface; it’s the same with sin and the marks it leaves on the soul. Darkness fi rst
strikes at the inside and then reveals itself slowly on the outside.
“When someone’s whole being has been tainted through and through,
he’s unable to understand or even see that he’s only adding to his impurity
every day. One could of course repent and ask for forgiveness, and relief may
be forthcoming, but when one’s heart has been so irreparably tarnished, then
one has lost all predisposition for repentance.”
After hearing God’s words, Jethro repeated them to the man the next time
they met, hoping to convince him of his errant ways, but he was surprised
when the man replied good-naturedly: “So tell me, Jethro, if God has caught
me in his snare, then where are His signs?”
Jethro was exasperated and later confi ded in God that the poor soul did
not believe his words. God spoke kindly to Jethro, relieving him of his duty as
a messenger in this case.
“I’m the Master Concealer,” decreed God. “But I will not share my wisdom with this unconscious creature. I’ll tell you one thing, though, Jethro: it’s
true that this man is adamant about performing his prayers and fasting, and 
69
he even willingly pays his religious taxes. However, his deeds are not honest
and don’t come from his heart! His faith has no essence. What appears on
the outside is pleasing, but in reality he’s a fraud. To have enthusiasm in one’s
heart for spirit is the essential seed for growth, which this man lacks entirely.”
Jethro did not question what had been revealed to him, and the next time
he met his old friend, he smiled knowingly and kept his silence.
70
Camel and Mouse
A merchant had been traveling all day long, and it was late afternoon when
he arrived at the caravansary, completely exhausted. He dismounted his
camel and vigilantly unloaded the burden it was carrying but was careless
when he tied the bridle to a post before walking inside the adjacent building
to rest for the night.
Soon afterward, the bridle loosened, and the camel began to walk away. A
little desert mouse spotted the bridle twisting like a snake on the ground and
quickly took it in her mouth and ran in front of the large beast. The camel,
who was bored, thought that the little mouse was entertaining and decided
not to whip his bridle out of her grip, allowing her to lead him on. The mouse
was chuffed, believing that she was in charge of guiding the mighty camel, and
began to feel proud of her unrivaled abilities.
“What a great hero I am!” she thought contentedly. “Just look at me pulling such a huge animal behind me!”
The camel noticed that pride was rising in the mouse’s heart but feigned
ignorance and allowed her to arrogantly continue pulling his bridle.
“I’ll let her enjoy her moment of splendor; who knows what the future
holds,” he said to himself philosophically.
The pair continued their journey for some time until they arrived at a
wide stream, which seemed like an endless river to the mouse. She climbed
upon a mound of dirt to see if she could spot the opposite bank, but it was
too far away to be visible. The camel was well aware of why the mouse was
stalling but pretended not to have noticed.
“Hey, little mouse, why have you stopped?” he asked her smugly. “Don’t
be a halfway friend, let’s get going,” he urged her on.
“My friend, the water is too deep and too fast! I’m afraid of drowning,”
she exclaimed helplessly.
“Let me check it out,” said the camel gallantly as he stepped into the
water. “You’re such a twat; this water isn’t deep at all! Look, it only comes up
to my knees!”
71
“This water may seem as insignifi cant as a small gathering of ants to you,
but to me it’s as impassable as a row of ferocious dragons! Your knee and mine
are quite different in height, can’t you see?” she pleaded.
“Perhaps you shouldn’t have been so audacious and had found another
mouse your own size to lead instead of hoping to master the mighty camel!”
he exclaimed emphatically.
“I repent, I repent,” repeated the mouse sincerely. “Help me cross this
water, and I’ll never let myself be ruled by my pride again.”
The camel felt pity for the little mouse.
“Hurry up and climb onto my hump,” he exclaimed sympathetically.
“Crossing this stream is simple for me; in fact, I could carry hundreds like
you in one crossing!”
And so the camel and the mouse continued their symbiotic companionship for the rest of their days together.
72
Shaykh on the Boat
There was once a shaykh who looked nothing like a high Sufi ; his clothes
were in tatters and he appeared gaunt and undernourished. One year, he
was obliged to go to a city that lay beyond the sea, and therefore he had no
choice but to travel by boat. As he was generally destitute, he boarded a luxury
boat but took refuge among the cargo. As the boat pulled away from the harbor, the gentle rocking soon lulled the shaykh into a deep slumber.
Not long after the boat began to sail, a man on board began to holler
and curse, for his pouch of gold coins had disappeared. The captain ordered
every passenger to be searched and searched again. Soon it was the turn of the
shaykh, who was still sound asleep resting among the passengers’ luggage. The
sailors reluctantly woke up the poor man and informed him of the situation,
ordering him to remove all his clothes so they could make sure he was not the
culprit.
The shaykh was embarrassed and deeply hurt.
“My Lord,” he turned to the heavens and begged his Master. “These mischievous infi dels are accusing Your humble servant of robbery. I beg of You to
order them to release me and take back their baseless allegations.”
The shaykh’s heart had been broken by the callousness of his fellow passengers and nothing could appease him, until he saw a miracle appear in the
broad sea that surrounded them. Millions of glittering fi sh poked their heads
out of the water, fl apping their tails vigorously to hold themselves upright,
each holding a precious pearl in her mouth worth the entire treasury of a
wealthy kingdom! The shaykh leaned over the side of the boat and collected
a few pearls from some nearby fi sh, nonchalantly tossing the pearls onto the
deck.
Then, like a crowned king seated on his throne, he levitated in air above
the moving boat. He turned his face toward the passengers and announced:
“You can have your boat with all its luxury, but I prefer the company of my
God instead. I’ll leave you now so that you don’t have to travel alongside a
thief. We shall soon see who benefi ts the most from this separation. I choose 
73
to pull away from you to join with God, who will never accuse me of any
wrongdoing nor leave me in the hands of unworthy liars and accusers.”
The passengers were awestruck and implored the shaykh to tell them how
he had managed to rise to such a glorious stature.
“I’ve never doubted the words of darvishes and shaykhs to begin with!”
he stated reproachfully. “I’ve never accused the poor of wrongdoing, nor have
I ever bothered God with the trifl ing affairs of this world, like you have!”
Before the passengers could ask him anything further, the shaykh vanished into thin air, as if he had never been there at all.
74
Reprimanding a Darvish
One day, a group of Sufi s went to their shaykh to complain about one
of their fellow darvishes. “Master, we need your help,” they pleaded.
“Please save us from this man’s company, for he’ll soon put an end to us all.”
“What’s your complaint, dear fellows?” asked the shaykh sympathetically.
“This chap is supposed to be a proper Sufi , but he suffers from three
major character fl aws,” one of the darvishes protested. “When he speaks, it’s
like a siren going off, loud and unremitting. When he eats, he polishes off the
portions of twenty men! And when he sleeps, oh my God when he sleeps, it’s
as if he’ll never wake up again!”
The shaykh listened to his students patiently and in due time called the
unpopular man to his presence. He kindly advised him to change his ways
and always adopt the middle path, never exaggerate in his behavior. The man
listened to his spiritual master quietly, trying to grasp the essence of what he
was being told. The master shaykh realized that this was a great opportunity
to impart essential Sufi teachings, interweaving them with his advice.
“When people exaggerate, they eventually become ill,” said the shaykh
with gravity. “One must always cooperate with one’s fellow Sufi s; otherwise,
separation and alienation will result. With the masses, Moses always spoke just
enough, but with close friends he elaborated his thoughts much more freely.
Once when he rambled on a bit too long with the prophet Khidr, he was
scolded and sent away, rebuked for having spoken far too much! If he wanted
to stay in Khidr’s company, he was told that he would have to remain mute and
blind. Now, my good man, if you, too, continue with your excessive behavior,
you’ll ultimately alienate all your friends!”
The shaykh felt that his words were slowly penetrating the young Sufi ’s
consciousness and decided to seize the moment and continue with his spiritual advice.
“You’re still a young Sufi ; choose your companions carefully. Find the
ones who thirst for your words. Try to live like a naked man, without any
embellishment or decoration. Seek the company of those who are free of these 
75
vanities, too. And if you can’t completely strip naked, then at least lighten your
load, remove your extra layers and adopt a balanced state of being.”
The young Sufi exclaimed his gratitude and paid his shaykh great courtesy, and then he asked permission to speak. “The middle path, my great
shaykh, is relative,” he said. “The water in a shallow stream may seem hardly
an obstacle to the camel, but to the mouse it’s a vast and swollen sea. When
someone has an appetite for four loaves of bread, he must consume at least
two or three loaves. For someone who can only appease his hunger with ten
loaves, he can perhaps manage with a minimum of six. I personally can easily
eat fi fty loaves of bread, so six loaves seem like nothing to me.
“One man may tire after saying ten prayers, but I’ve the stamina to recite,
without a break, at least fi ve hundred prayers. One person might be brave and
selfl ess and give up his life willingly for a worthy cause, while another man will
give up his life before submitting to part with a single loaf of bread!”
The young man fell silent and lowered his head respectfully before his
shaykh. The shaykh, too, remained silent.
“Ah, and when it comes to sleep,” remembered the Sufi , “I may sleep for
hours on end, but my heart is perpetually awake. One should be wary of those
whose bodies are restless but whose hearts are chronically numb. My heart
gazes into both worlds, and I can clearly see how many people get stuck in
the mud while I glide over it with ease. I may be cohabiting with them on the
earth, but I walk in the heavens.
“I’ve surpassed plain thoughts and have gone far beyond. As I take to the
air, I leave mundane ruminations behind. It is I who choose to descend, so that
these lame devotees of yours may benefi t from my presence.”
He kissed the edge of his shaykh’s robe, stepped away without showing
his back to his master, and quietly walked out of the room.
76
The Tree of Eternal Life
A learned man who had traveled the world over was heard telling a story
about a tree in India whose fruit bestowed eternal life. The story was
brought to the attention of the king, who, like most people, desired to live
forever, and he instantly became obsessed with fi nding the tree. He ordered
one of his most trusted ministers to travel to India in search of the special
fruit and gave him ample funds to support his travels.
Upon arrival in India, the minister began his thorough search from the
southernmost point of the subcontinent to the remotest mountains in the
north. He traveled from town to town and from village to village, asking every
person he came across about the tree and its fruit. Most people laughed in his
face, taking him for an imbecile, while others just ignored him as they would
a madman. The minister spent many lonely days and nights in foreign places,
only rarely coming across a friendly face. If anyone did speak to him earnestly,
it was to convince him to give up his useless search, to tell him that he was
wasting his precious life. Some people would tease him and give him false
directions to an imaginary tree in some diffi cult location, making him go off
his trail and wasting more of his time. Mostly, though, people just laughed at
him and took him for a fool.
The devoted minister, however, did not give up, pressing on with his mission tirelessly. To ensure that he did not quit, the king regularly sent him suffi cient funds to support him. Years passed, and the minister turned gray and
old, and he fi nally had to admit that he had failed. With tearful eyes, he began
his journey back home after years of absence and hardship.
On his way back, he decided to pay a visit to a learned shaykh whom he
had heard about, hoping to receive a blessing from him. However, the minute
his eyes met the shaykh’s, he burst into tears, sobbing uncontrollably for quite
some time. Once he managed to take control of his senses, he confessed to the
holy man: “Great shaykh, I’ve lost my way! I haven’t achieved what I set out to
achieve all those years ago, and now I’m returning to my master shamefaced
and empty-handed. I beg of you to take pity on me and show me the right
path.”
77
“What are you searching for, my good man?” asked the shaykh with
compassion.
“Years ago, my king sent me in search of a tree that produces a fruit that
gives eternal life. I’ve wasted my youth searching for it, but I never found it. All
I found was sarcasm and pity!” whimpered the minister.
“My wise man, this tree you speak of is the Tree of Knowledge, which
grows within the human heart!” imparted the shaykh benignly. “You’ve been
searching for what’s readily apparent, and in the process, you’ve given up on
the real meaning of life. This phenomenon is called by different names; one
calls it the sea, another calls it a cloud, while another calls it a tree or even the
sun, and many more names besides. Knowledge has thousands of uses, one of
which is eternal life! God is one and without a rival, but He gives forth infi nite
signs. Think about it: a man may be your father, but he’s also someone’s son;
what may seem like anger in the eyes of an enemy is kindness to a friend.
“You’ve been saddled with only one of His signs, namely the tree that
you’ve been seeking. If you don’t want to remain defeated, it’s time for you to
ignore what you see on the surface and begin to concentrate on the essence.
What creates differences between men is precisely this superfi ciality, but once
they understand what lies beneath the surface, duality vanishes.”
The minister felt an immense burden lifted from his shoulders; he no
longer felt dejected or defeated. His heart had opened, and he knew that his
passage back home would be one of joy rather than grief.
78
Grapes for Four
Four men had been traveling in the same caravan all day long but had
not spoken a word to one another. When their convoy stopped for the
evening, the four men made a fi re together and warmed themselves as they
gathered around it.
The men were from four different countries, and none spoke the others’ languages. They were Persian, Arab, and Turkish, and the fourth man, a
Greek speaker, was from the Sultanate of Rûm. They were laborers in tattered
clothes who looked destitute. As they sat huddled together, shaking like leaves
in the chill air, one of their fellow travelers, who was better off, took pity and
offered them a small sum of money so they could buy something to eat.
The Persian was quick to suggest: “Let’s spend our money on grapes.”
“What a creep! I don’t want what he wants, I want grapes,” said the Arab
defi antly.
“No, my dear fellows,” complained the Turk, “I don’t like what you’ve
suggested; I prefer grapes.”
“Come on guys, don’t argue. It’s best if we all agree to buy grapes,” concluded the man from Rûm in Greek.
Not understanding each other, the men began fi ghting, throwing punches
and cursing in their own respective tongues. As the men fought among each
other, a wise and holy man saw them from afar and quickly approached them.
Succeeding in separating them, he managed to fi nd out what their problem
was, as he was fl uent in all four languages. Thanks to the wisdom of the sage,
the grapes were soon acquired, relieving the four unwitting men from the
burden of their rage.
79
The Duckling
A storm had dislodged a cluster of duck eggs from the safety of the treelined shore, where their mother had created a safe haven for them in the
shade. As they fl oated purposelessly over the foaming waves, one of the eggs
got caught in a whirlpool and was separated from the others. Under the pressure of the swirling water, the shell broke, and a little duckling poked his head
out, trying to breath in the new air. The relentless waves, however, tossed the
cracked egg onto the unfriendly shore, separating him forever from the other
eggs.
The tiny duckling struggled to emerge from the cracked shell and fi nally
managed to waddle away from the devouring sea onto dry sand. Unable to
fend for himself, the little duckling felt abandoned and frightened. As luck
would have it, a hen whose eggs had just hatched was nearby and saw the
helpless creature rolling around feebly on the endless expanse of shore. She
approached him and with great kindness sheltered him under her wing, taking
him to her own chicks.
The newborns grew up together and were able to nourish themselves
without the aid of their mother hen fairly quickly. The duckling, though,
always found himself drawn to the water but was too frightened to go in, as
he saw that none of his siblings had any desire to even try. He was torn inside,
unable to comprehend why he felt the way he did. Some days he only wanted
to be on dry land, but other days all he wanted was to get wet.
Although he couldn’t fully understand his own nature, at the same time he
couldn’t deny it either; much like we humans, who belong to the spirit world
and always yearn to go back but are caught in the snare of the material world,
unable to fully detach ourselves.
MaSNaVi�iii
82
Elephant Eaters
A group of men had been on the road in India for days without food
or water. Unfamiliar with the terrain they were covering and unable to
feed themselves, they became desperately undernourished. Nevertheless, they
continued on their journey, famished and distraught but determined to reach
their fi nal destination.
In a twist of luck, a learned man who had traveled in that area many times
before and was familiar with the wildlife of the region happened to cross
their path. Looking at the condition of their clothing and their pale faces, he
quickly concluded that they were hungry strangers and felt compelled to warn
them about the elephants that roamed the land.
“Greetings my good men, I can see that you’re tired and hungry, for there’s
not much prey in these parts,” he commiserated. “But beware that elephants
roam freely in this area, and their young, who are plump, sometimes get separated from their mothers and are then easily caught. You must never, ever try
to hunt an elephant calf, though, for his mother will fi nd you no matter how
many miles you may think you’ve traveled from where you caught the calf.
She will sniff out her child’s scent on you, and she’ll trample you to death the
moment she catches up. Mark my words and stick to eating herbs and fruits,
if you fi nd them!”
The exhausted men listened to the wise man’s words, thanked him for
his advice, and continued on their journey. Desperately hungry, they looked
under every shrub and up every tree that might bear fruit, but they found
nothing edible. Suddenly, one of the men spotted an elephant calf who had
been separated from his clan. Without hesitation, the men, except for one who
heeded the wise man’s advice, attacked the young beast and, facing minimal
resistance, killed him on the spot.
Too famished to listen to the learned man’s warnings, the men quickly
started a fi re and cooked the plump animal, feasting on his fl esh. Having satisfi ed their hunger at last, they washed their hands and faces in a stream nearby
and promptly fell asleep on the banks. The conscientious man who had not 
83
participated in the slaughter or touched a morsel of the fl esh decided to stay
awake and guard their camp, instinctively feeling that the wise man had not
warned them without good reason.
Meanwhile, the mother elephant had been searching everywhere for her
young one, growing more furious and exasperated by the minute. Sniffi ng
everything with her long, sturdy trunk, she eventually detected her offspring’s
scent in the near distance and quickened her step. In a wink of an eye, she
was upon the felons’ camp. She approached the one man who was awake and
sniffed him from head to toe, especially around his mouth, to see if she could
detect the scent of her baby. The man was immobile, tongue-tied with fright.
She circled him three times to make sure she had not made a mistake and then
passed him by without harming him, quickly going to the other men sleeping
a little farther away.
She sniffed the fi rst man’s mouth and immediately smelled her baby, then
crushed him under her forelegs, the size of stone pillars, and threw him up
in the air with her mighty trunk, breaking virtually every bone in his body.
Then she approached the others who had feasted on her child, and, one by
one, subjected them to the same excruciating treatment without showing the
least sign of remorse.
When the last guilty man had been slaughtered, the mother elephant
returned to the man who had refrained from eating her offspring. She graciously knelt down before him and in one quick swoop lifted him with her
trunk onto her back and gallantly carried him to his fi nal destination.
84
The Painted Jackal
A scrawny jackal was ambling on his own when he slipped and fell into
a puddle of paint. He splashed and rolled around happily for a while
until he got tired and decided to walk back to his pack. As he stepped out of
the puddle, he noticed that he was now covered in a variety of colors: his left
side was red, his right side was yellow, his paws were white, his tail was green,
and his chest was blue. Turning his head around from side to side toward his
own frame, he began to admire himself, surmising that he had become more
beautiful than even the heavenly looking peacock.
Proudly and coquettishly, he wandered in among his fellow jackals, pretending not to notice how they stared at him skeptically. Self-importantly,
the jackal ignored his old friends, quickly adopting a haughty attitude toward
them. The jackals who had known him since they were puppies were hardly
impressed with his new behavior. “What on earth are these colors you’ve
painted yourself with?” they asked him. “You’re so engrossed with your new
look that it seems you’ve forgotten your lifelong friends. Remember, you’re
nothing more than a plain jackal, just like the rest of us. What’s gone into your
head? Why all this unfounded pride all of a sudden?”
The painted jackal ignored their comments and continued to strut his
attitude. One of the jackals who knew him better than the others approached
him nonchalantly: “What’s going on? What’ve you got up your sleeve? Are
you playing at tricking us or do you simply want to stir our jealousy so you
can manipulate us later?” He concluded: “You can see that none of us are
impressed with you. In fact, no one is paying you any attention! No doubt
you’ll soon show your true colors!”
The jackal didn’t climb down from his high horse, instead pompously
urging: “Have a good look at my dazzling colors! Have you ever, in your
entire life, come across such an outstanding idol? I’ve become like a garden
of enchanting fl owers, blossoming in hundreds of colors. Observe my grace
and beauty and kneel before my majesty. The world is a more glorious place 
85
because I exist, for I’m a sign of God’s graciousness. I’ve become a tablet brimming with His beauty.”
He then turned to face the other jackals and spat out: “You lowly beasts,
don’t you ever dare call me a jackal again. When was a jackal ever as magnifi -
cent as I?”
The jackals circled around him and asked: “If not a jackal, then what
should we call you?”
“I’m the exquisite male peacock, as lustrous as Jupiter!”
“If you’re a peacock, then let’s hear your unrivaled, piercing song,” they
demanded shrewdly.
“No, no, no! Singing I cannot do!”
The jackals all burst into loud laughter and walked away from the delusional painted jackal, shaking their heads in amusement at his inept mind.
86
Elephant in the Dark
I
n a faraway region, there was a remote town built purely by the sweat of its
inhabitants’ brows. The people of this town had never seen an elephant before,
and when Hindus arrived with their majestic animal, it was indeed a novel event.
The elephant was a prized possession, and the Hindu owners insisted that he be
kept indoors to spare him from the cold desert night. Thus, the glorious animal
was kept in the largest structure the inhabitants could provide.
The townspeople were thrilled when they discovered that the owners of
the noble beast had brought him to put on a show in every town they passed
through. They insisted on seeing the elephant that same evening despite the
owners’ emphatic insistence that the animal could not be viewed properly
in the dark. However, the townspeople did not mind the darkness, and they
were willing to pay extra. They were adamant that they couldn’t wait until the
following morning and had to see the animal that very fi rst night. At last the
owners relented and allowed the people to enter the stable but insisted that
they had to go inside one by one, as the elephant was taking up most of the
space inside the structure.
The fi rst viewer walked in cautiously and felt the elephant’s trunk. “This
animal resembles a pipe!” he declared when he stepped outside.
The second person stepped in and began to caress the elephant’s ear.
“No, this beast is like a big fan!” he reported.
The third curious person walked in and pressed his palms against the
elephant’s strong and sturdy legs, exclaiming as he stepped out: “What fan?
This elephant is as robust as a pillar!”
The fourth man, who was very tall, entered the enclosure and began to
run his hands over the elephant’s back. “This creature is as fl at as a bed!” he
said with disappointment.
As more and more people walked inside the dark room, each one came
out with a different understanding of the phenomenon they had encountered.
None of them were able to truly fi nd out what the elephant actually looked
like, for they were in the dark and had to rely on the acute limitations of their
imperfect senses.
87
The Grey Beard
The barber had just opened his shop and was sweeping the fl oor when a
man rushed in and demanded to be served.
“Good morning, my good sir,” said the barber politely. “How can I be
of service?”
“Good morning,” hurried the man. “Please, quickly, can you separate
and cut out the white hairs in my beard? I’ve just taken a young bride, and she
doesn’t like my gray look.”
The barber took a quick look at the customer, who had already sat down
in the barber’s chair, ready for his shave. He noticed that the man’s beard was
not just “salt and peppery” but in fact nearly all white. He took out his razor
and shaved the man’s entire beard off in one quick motion, then laid it before
him, commenting disdainfully: “Here’s your beard; you can separate the gray
yourself! I’ve got work to do.”
The barber then turned his back on the customer and continued with his
sweeping.
88
The Sound of the Slap
A man was sitting quietly on a bench, minding his own business, when a
younger man plopped himself down heavily beside him. Before the fi rst
man could turn to see who had just sat down, the other man slapped him
loudly on the back of the neck. The fi rst man was outraged and instinctively
turned to defend himself by tackling his assailant, when the young man said
philosophically: “Please, please, wait a second before you slap me back! Can
you just tell me something: when I slapped you, did you hear how loud it was?
So, do you suppose that the sound came from my hand, which delivered the
slap, or was it your neck that made that loud sound?”
The fi rst man grew even more furious and snapped back: “You idiot, who
cares?” He continued, hot with impatience: “I’m twisting and burning with
pain, and you’re wondering where the sound came from? Have you got nothing better to do than make a nuisance of yourself and waste people’s time?”
Wisely deciding not to waste his own time with such a fool, he stood up
from the bench, threw one last disdainful look at the useless philosophizing
stranger, and walked away, rubbing his neck tenderly.
89
The Love Letter
A young couple in love had been separated from each other for over a
year. The young man had suffered greatly and written many long, heartwrenching letters to his beloved, complaining about his sorry state of mind
and heart. One early morning, he walked into a lush garden near the girl’s
home and, as luck would have it, the girl was there, too. He didn’t miss a beat
and quickly approached her, noting that her old nanny, who usually accompanied her, was absent.
Thrilled that after so long a time he was able to sit by her side and hold her
soft gaze, he took out copies of his love letters, which he carried with him at all
times, and began to read them out loud. He recounted over and over again how
much he had suffered day and night, how his lips had not touched a morsel of
food, how his eyes had been wet with tears every single day. The girl took a few
minutes to gather her thoughts and realized what her beloved was doing.
“When you’ve already written all these words to me, why are you repeating yourself and wasting our precious little time together?” she said with obvious pain in her tone. “I’m sitting here next to you, and you’re reading love
letters to me? This isn’t the behavior of someone in love!”
The boy, taken aback, responded in disbelief: “I don’t seem to recognize
the same girl I knew last year! I drank from her fresh spring a year ago and
bathed my eyes and heart in her crystal-clear water. I can still see the spring,
but there’s no water! Has a thief perhaps redirected the stream?”
“I’m not the one you love, my dear!” exclaimed the girl downheartedly.
“I belong to one side of the world and you to the other. You’re only in love
with the state of being in love, not with me! You’re attached to me hoping to
experience that state once again. This isn’t true love. The true lover is as one
with his beloved; his beginning and end are contained in her beginning and
end. They’re one and the same. If you truly seek pure love, keep on searching,
for that’s the only water that will quench your thirst for a lifetime. That is the
original fountain of purity that your soul has been reaching for, not me !”
She stood up, took one last look at the young man’s stunned face, and
quietly walked away.
90
Students and Teacher
The students were exasperated by their dreadfully strict teacher, who never
allowed them a moment’s respite. Every day, they conjured up naughty
plans to distract him but somehow never managed to fool him. One day, the
cleverest of the boys, who was also the most streetwise, came up with a brilliant plan. As his classmates gathered around him after school, he explained
to them:
“Tomorrow morning when we come to school, I’ll approach the master
fi rst and ask him how he feels and why he’s looking so pale. I’ll wish him well
and say that he should take better care of himself. Then, you all should follow my lead and one after the other repeat the same questions so that we can
instill doubt in his heart. After the fi fth or sixth person, surly he must begin
to wonder whether we’ve got a point or not. When thirty of us have told him
the same thing, he’ll have no choice but to believe us and let us off school at
least for a couple of days.”
The boys were all excited and commended the clever boy for his astute
idea. The boy made them all promise not to tell their parents and stick to
their scheme. The next morning, the students were all on time and awaited
the arrival of the clever boy, for they could not begin their plot without him.
As soon as he arrived, they nodded to each other and one by one entered the
classroom.
“Good morning to you, sir. Are you all right sir? Why do you seem so
pale this fi ne morning?” said the clever boy to the teacher cunningly.
“I’m perfectly fi ne. What are you blabbering about? Go sit down in your
seat,” the teacher ordered the boy in his usual abrasive manner.
The fi rst seed of doubt had been planted. The students then walked into
the classroom one after the other and each addressed the teacher in turn,
commenting with concern on the latter’s health. Despite his repeated denials,
the teacher slowly began to believe the boys, as he had heard the same remark
about his pale countenance thirty times. He began to shiver and actually feel
feverish. Soon, he was hastily packing his papers and books and hurrying
home, with thirty boys in tow.
91
All the way home, he was thinking about how his wife had recently been
neglecting him, and how despite all his kindness and generosity she’d been
wishing him ill. Entertaining these negative thoughts about his innocent wife,
the teacher hastened through the narrow backstreets to his humble home,
while the boys followed him closely every step of the way.
He slammed the front door noisily, intending thus to announce his
untimely arrival to his wife as he entered their house. When she saw that he
had returned from school so early, she quickly approached him and inquired
about his health.
“Are you blind? Don’t you see how sick I am? You’re such a hypocrite! You
can very well see how awful I’m feeling, yet you pretend that nothing’s the
matter with me!” he retorted.
“My darling, what are you saying? You must be suffering from delusions.
Nothing is the matter with you!” his wife said, trying to appease his anger.
“You’re despicable; you’re a horrid woman! Can’t you see my sorry state?
Is it my fault that you’re blind and deaf to my needs?” he continued, cruelly
slandering his wife.
“I’m going to bring you the mirror so you can see for yourself that nothing’s the matter with you.”
“To hell with your mirror! You’ve always hated me and wished me the
worst. Go and prepare my bed, I need to rest!”
The woman was stunned, unable to move or decide what she should do,
when her husband screamed at her: “Get going, you good-for-nothing! Do
you want me to pass out right here?”
The woman decided to remain quiet and do as he asked; otherwise, he
might indeed think that she had foul intentions, and he could truly turn nasty.
Thus, she prepared his bedding on the fl oor and left him with his students,
who had accompanied him into the house. The boys gathered around his bed
and began to review their lesson loudly, having been instructed by their ringleader to make as much noise as possible to exacerbate their teacher’s fantasy
headache.
“Quiet!” snapped the teacher. “Quiet, I said! Go home. Leave me in
peace.”
92
The students were free at last; wishing their teacher all the health in the
world, they practically fl ew out of his house. They didn’t go home, though,
and instead remained in the streets, playing various games that they’d long
fantasized about. Their mothers, however, soon found out that their sons had
skipped school, and when they found them on the streets they reprimanded
them, refusing to accept that they’d been excused by their teacher. They threatened to visit the teacher’s home the next day and fi nd out the truth. And
so they did. They found the poor man lying miserably under several duvets,
sweating like a pig and moaning in pain.
“Dear sir, forgive us, for we didn’t believe our sons,” confessed the women.
“Now we can see for ourselves how ill you really are! May God grant you a
long, healthy life.”
“I’m actually grateful to your perceptive sons for having detected my
malady,” said the teacher gratefully. “I was so intent on teaching them that I
had totally ignored my own health. If it hadn’t been for them, I’d have soon
been dead for certain!”
And such was the fate of the ignorant teacher, who’d been fooled by baseless repetition and indoctrination conducted by mere children.
93
The Wise Goldsmith
The goldsmith opened the shutters of his shop as usual, unlocked the
door, and immediately began to sweep the fl oor. He hated having to
work in a dusty environment, and it had become his habit for years to do one
round of sweeping every morning, even though his assistant was responsible
for the upkeep of the shop. That morning, shortly after he fi nished cleaning
up, an old man walked in, a small pouch in his hand.
“Good morning, my good man. Can you please lend me your scale so I
can weigh my gold scraps?” he asked politely.
“Go on your way, old man. I’ve no sieve, no broom, and no time to sift
through your stuff!”
“What? Are you mocking me? I asked you for a simple scale,” retorted
the old man.
“I told you, I’ve no broom nor a sieve in the shop.”
“I asked you for a scale. I didn’t ask for a broom or a sieve! What are you
rambling on about?”
The goldsmith, who was an old hand at his business, looked the old man
in the eyes and tried his best to be kind:
“I heard you the fi rst time, my dear fellow! I’m not deaf, and don’t even
think that I might be dumb. You, however, are old and your hands shake.
Your gold is in small pieces, almost as fi ne as powder! With one errant shake
of your hand, the whole batch will be on the fl oor. Then you’ll ask me for a
broom to sweep up the gold, which will now be mixed in with the dust from
the fl oor. Next, you’ll be asking me for a sieve to clear out the dust. From that
very fi rst moment you stepped into my shop, I could see the end result of our
encounter! Please don’t give me any trouble and go on your way!” concluded
the wise goldsmith, who by now was holding the door open for the old man
to take his leave.
94
The Basket Weaver
There was once a Sufi shaykh who had no arms, yet he managed to weave
baskets for a living. He never shared his secret with anyone and generally
remained aloof from people. He lived on his own, up in the mountains that
loomed over the town. One day, as he was busily weaving a new basket—with
both arms and hands intact—a man stumbled into his hut.
“Have you lost your mind?” the Sufi rebuked the intruder. “Why did you
rush into my home like a madman? Who gave you permission to enter?”
“Forgive me, master, I was overawed and lost control!” replied the young
seeker, obviously distressed that he had unsettled the old man.
The old basket weaver smiled gently and told him: “Now that you’ve seen
my secret, promise me that until I die you’ll never divulge it to anyone, be it
friend or foe.”
As he uttered these words, he noticed a group of people hunched outside the window of his hut. They had heard him ask the young novice to
keep his secret, and they had seen him weaving his basket using his own arms
and hands. He knew that his secret was out but could not understand the
reason for this intrusion into his quiet and devoted life. Trusting in God and
His wisdom, the old man continued with his weaving, ignoring the intruders
whenever they happened to walk by. His prayers for an explanation were soon
answered through a revelation:
“As you quietly carried on with your work, a group of untrusting townsfolk circulated rumors that you are a liar and impostor. I did not wish them to
be considered infi dels and be accused of questioning God’s miracles. Therefore, I made them privy to your secret. I wished them to see with their own
eyes the miracle that you can weave with both hands, so that they always trust
and believe in God and be spared from eternal ignorance.”
Relieved that he was safe in his solitude, the old master continued weaving his baskets until the day he died.
95
Not Mourning the Dead
Years ago, there was a Sufi shaykh, righteous and holy, who was revered
by all. As it happened, an unknown illness took the lives of two of his
children. His household, the entire neighborhood, indeed people from far and
away mourned this calamity for weeks on end. The only person who never
shed a tear was the shaykh himself. Much time passed, but still there were no
tears, no signs of mourning. People were perplexed, unable to decipher what
had happened to their favorite holy man. At last a devotee gently approached
him: “Forgive my intrusion, great shaykh, but we’re all in a state of disbelief,”
she said sheepishly.
“How can I help you, my dear?” inquired the shaykh, looking up from
his reading.
“How can you remain so aloof and unfeeling about the loss of your
darling children, while grief over their tragedy has bent our backs in double?
You’re our leader and master whom we trust intrinsically, and we ultimately
hope to fi nd solace in you during our own illness and demise. Why this silence?
Don’t you feel any pain? Perhaps you’ve no compassion left in your heart! How
can we continue to hope for your guidance in our hour of need?”
On and on she pestered the shaykh, who remained silent, allowing her to
speak her mind and relieve herself of the disappointment she felt. When she
fi nally fi nished, the shaykh gently explained: “My dear girl, don’t imagine for
a moment that I’m void of compassion and love. I feel empathy even for sinners; I’ve compassion even for rocks and stones, which can injure people! Even
dogs who bite us get my sympathy, and I pray that God may relieve them of
this particular foul habit!”
“When you feel such mercy for strangers and offer them guidance like
the good shepherd you are, how come you don’t mourn the loss of your own
children? Tears are a sign of kindness and love, yet your eyes are never moist
like ours.”
The shaykh turned his face to the woman and said: “My good woman,
let me tell you, winter is not like the summer! Although my children are gone, 
96
they’re not absent before my heart’s eyes; in fact, they’re very much alive. When
I see them living joyfully like this, how can I scratch my eyes out like you do?
They may not be present at this time, but I can see them playing all around
me. They cry when they feel the separation between us, but I’m always with
them. Some people may see them in their dreams, but I see them while I’m
awake. I’ve let go of the senses and hide myself from the people of this world,
and that’s how I can observe everyone in silence. Having such a treasure, why
should I be shedding tears needlessly?”
97
Valuable Advice
During the prophet’s lifetime, people would travel from faraway lands to
pay him their respects in person, often enduring much hardship on their
journey. Generally, people came with their problems, and they always left with
valuable advice that turned their lives around for the better.
One day, the prophet was busy with his usual daily tasks when one of his
old followers, who had not seen him for a while, approached him. At fi rst, the
follower was reluctant to discuss his predicament with the great man, as he was
embarrassed to confess to his shortcomings. After beating around the bush
for a while, he fi nally presented his dilemma.
“I desperately need to hear your insight, my honorable friend,” he said,
swallowing his pride uneasily. “I’m supposed to be a businessman, but every
time I make a purchase, I lose money! It matters not if I’m buying or selling;
it’s as if I become enchanted and lose my grip and can’t see right from wrong
when the time comes to settle the business! My trading partners all get the
better of me, and I’m always left short. What can I do to stop this vicious
cycle?”
The prophet didn’t waste precious time and immediately advised his
friend: “When you see that you’re being taken advantage of and are unable to
make the proper decision, be patient and wait. In fact, try to wait for at least
three whole days, for patience is one of God’s most precious qualities, while
rushing headlong into decisions is specifi c to the devil!” He then continued:
“When you throw a slice of bread in front of a hungry dog, does he eat it
right away? Of course not! He fi rst smells it to make sure it’s safe, and then he
eats it. The dog uses his power of smell to make wise decisions as they pertain
to him, while men and women must use their minds and their wisdom!”
The prophet looked deep into his companion’s eyes and knew at once
that his advice had left its mark on the man’s consciousness. He was reassured
in his heart that his words would soon turn the man’s fortunes.
98
Escaping the Fool
A young man was walking to work when someone unexpectedly whizzed
by him with such great speed that he felt a rush of air brushing against
his face. He turned around and saw Jesus of Nazareth running like the wind,
prompting him to wonder whether a hungry lion was in hot pursuit. The man
noticed that in fact no one was chasing Jesus, and he felt obliged to inform
him. After a long sprint, when he had almost caught up with Jesus, he called
out breathlessly: “Stop. Stop please! You’re fl ying as fast as an eagle! But no
one’s following you!”
Jesus was in such a rush that he didn’t hear a word. The man, though,
did not give up and continued to chase him, screaming as loud as his lungs
permitted: “For God’s sake stop for a moment and tell me who you’re fl eeing!
No enemy or wild beast is after you, so why this fl ight?”
“Don’t stall me, I’m in a hurry to save myself!” confessed Jesus as they
both continued to run side by side.
“Aren’t you Jesus of Nazareth, who cures the blind and the deaf ?” asked
the man, looking perplexed.
“I am,” asserted Jesus.
“Aren’t you the prophet who sees the unseen, who breathes life into the
dead?”
“Indeed, I am capable of all that.”
“Isn’t it you who can turn a lump of clay into a living bird?”
Again, Jesus admitted that he could indeed bring life to the lifeless.
“With your unrivaled gifts from the spirit world,” continued the breathless man, “who would choose not to serve you?”
“As God is my witness, I whispered the sacred word entrusted to me by
God to a blind man and a deaf man, and both were miraculously healed. I
shouted the word at the mountain, and it shattered into millions of tiny little
pebbles. I breathed the word onto a corpse, and he was given back life! But a
thousand times I’ve wished it on the fool, and it’s never had the slightest effect!
That’s who I’m fl eeing to save my life!”
99
The Drummer Thief
I
t was pitch dark in the middle of the night, when silence normally rules,
except tonight the unrelenting tap-tap-tap of a hammer and chisel made
sleep a distant and unachievable dream. A fearless thief, who had managed to
dodge the authorities, was patiently digging a crawl space under a garden wall,
trying to get access to the house within. The house’s owner, who had been ill
for some time, lay sleepless on his bed tossing and turning in pain. The constant tapping guaranteed that he would fi nd no rest.
Frustrated and misty in the head because of his fever, the owner forced
himself to creep out of bed with great diffi culty. He was intent on fi nding out
the source of the uninterrupted and annoying noise. He opened the window
and leaned out to see if he could spot anything suspicious in the dark.
“Who’s there in the dead of the night?” he screamed, indeed expecting a
response.
The tapping stopped momentarily but resumed at a greater speed in no
time. The owner, much to his dismay, couldn’t fi gure out where the noise came
from or what its source could be! Once again, he shouted into the darkness:
“Who’s there? What’re you doing making such a racket? Digging a well?”
“No, my friend,” replied the sinister thief disdainfully, “I’m playing the
drum for your pleasure!”
“But that’s not the sound of a drum I hear!” replied the owner, confounded.
“You will tomorrow, when you hear the screaming and shouting of your
household and that of your neighbors!” said the thief cunningly, implying that
fools truly deserve what comes to them.
100

Lover of Prayer
Songor was a Moslem slave who belonged to a wealthy master who happened to be a nonbeliever. The slave was a conscientious worker who was
never at fault in performing his duties. He was always up at dawn and always
the last to go to sleep, making sure that everything in his master’s house was
in perfect order.
One morning, the master woke up earlier than usual and decided to go to
the public bathhouse before the crowds appeared. He went to Songor’s room
and, seeing that he was already awake, ordered him to collect the necessary
items for bathing: a bowl to pour water over his body, a towel for drying, and
a special mud block to scrub and wash his hair.
Having collected all they needed, the master and slave left for the bathhouse together. On the way, they came across a small mosque, and, as it was
the morning prayer time, it was full of devoted Moslems. Songor, who was
extremely fond of such devotions and prayed every chance he found, begged
his master to allow him to enter the mosque and perform the morning prayers
with his fellow Moslems.
“Master, I never get a chance to perform my morning prayers in the
mosque; will you please allow me to do so now? I promise it won’t take long.
You can rest on this stool here until I’m fi nished.”
The master was amenable to this delay but told him to be quick. Songor
hurried inside the mosque and stood shoulder to shoulder with his brethren,
performing his prayer. After it was over, the imam and all the men left the
mosque one by one; soon the mosque was empty, except for Songor. The
master waited patiently until the sun had risen and it was time for breakfast,
but Songor was nowhere to be seen. Losing patience, he went to the entrance
of the mosque and called for his slave.
“They’re not letting me come out,” replied Songor. “I know you’re waiting outside, but please wait a bit longer, and I’ll be with you in no time.”
102
“But Songor, there’s no one left inside the mosque! Who’s not letting you
out?”
“It’s the one and only Allah! The same one who has bound your feet
outside and won’t let you come into the mosque, is holding me inside and not
letting me go!”
103
Patience
The legendary physician Loghman had been in the service of the great
king David for many years. During one particularly busy period when
he was quite occupied with his numerous patients, he had been unable to pay
his regular visits to the popular king of the Jews. After several weeks, when
Loghman fi nally found himself free of patients, he decided to pay a call on
his beloved master.
Duly he arrived at the palace and was told that David was busy at work in
a nearby barn. As Loghman approached the ramshackle barn, he found David
hard at work, with sparks fl ying in the air all around him. Immersed in the
task at hand, David did not immediately notice Loghman enter the barn and
continued toiling away. A heap of small metal rods lay before him, which he
skillfully heated and looped into circles and then linked together, creating a
smooth garment of chain mail. He continued in this fashion for some time,
repeating the procedure patiently.
Until that day, Loghman had never witnessed the craft of manufacturing
armor, and he was baffl ed. He was dying to ask David what he was making;
however, he stopped himself and thought it best to wait and not interrupt
the master craftsman. He knew that, invariably, patience directs people much
more quickly to their desired objective, and he trusted his intuition. “When
one doesn’t persist in sating one’s curiosity, one often gets what one wants that
much quicker,” he thought to himself.
Thus, Loghman remained silent and continued to patiently observe
David. Once the king was fi nished with his work, he pulled the armor over his
head and shoulders and turned to face Loghman: “This is the best outfi t to
wear at war! I guarantee that it will protect a man against the deadliest blows,”
declared David, noticing the surprise in Loghman’s face.
Loghman was thrilled that he had kept his silence despite his curiosity
and had not interrupted the master at work.
104
Balal’s Passing
Everyone knew Balal and what a great man he had turned out to be, albeit
only a slave. He had lived an honest life and had served his wonderful
master with great love and respect. Balal had aged prematurely, but he didn’t
mind. As he lay on his deathbed, his wife could see that she was losing him
fast.
“My precious love, you’re leaving me!” she sobbed. “Misfortune is knocking at our door; we’re doomed!”
“No, no my dearest!” uttered Balal weakly but compassionately. “It’s time
to rejoice and be merry! Until now, this life’s been laden with sorrow and
mourning. Let me tell you that death is in fact life itself!”
When Balal spoke of death, his face lit up like fresh tulips and narcissus,
his eyes beaming with delight. One could not detect any sign of illness or the
imminent death that awaited him, but these blessings were hidden from his
wife, and she continued crying her heart out miserably.
“The time of separation is upon us!” she lamented.
“No, my love, the time for reunion has arrived!”
“You shall leave your family behind tonight and enter a strange and foreign abode.”
“Tonight, I shall leave this alien place at last and step into my cherished
eternal home!” uttered Balal as his whole being prepared for his fi nal journey.
“Will I ever see you again after tonight?” whimpered his wife.
“I shall be among the great men of God! If you can keep your heart clear
and aim for spirit, giving up your attachment to this lowly world, one day we
shall meet again.”
Balal spoke his fi nal words with great love and warmth in his heart and
closed his eyes for the last time.
105
Which City Is Best?
Two lovers had found a quiet corner in the rose garden early in the morning before the crowds appeared.
“My darling, you’ve traveled the world over and seen many beautiful cities
and other incredible sites,” murmured the young girl to her loved one, hoping
to challenge him. “Tell me honestly, which is your favorite city?”
“There could only be one place in the world, my love, and that’s right
here! My garden of joy is to be by your side, even if we were in the middle of
the driest desert! If I ever found myself at the bottom of a dark well but my
love was next to me, I’d be in paradise! So the simple answer to your question
is: the best city in the world is where one’s love is! And for me, it’s right here
next to you.”
The embrace that followed his confession was the sweetest either had
ever tasted.
106
Guest Killer Mosque
Outside the town of Rey in Persia, there stood a mosque that had earned
a shocking reputation. The town’s inhabitants called it the Guest Killer
Mosque, and for good reason! Strangers, however, did not know this deadly
secret, and every time one arrived in Rey and took refuge in the mosque for
the night, he was killed and his body recovered the next morning. People from
Rey never entered the mosque at night, convinced that the place was haunted
and that djinns lived in its dark, empty corners.
One day a man arrived who was well aware of the mosque’s reputation
but nevertheless wished to check the validity of the locals’ superstition, as well
as test his own courage. “I will not value my own body beyond its worth, for
it’s the spirit that’s priceless beyond all,” he argued to himself. “One’s body will
inevitably perish, but spirit is everlasting.”
When the townsfolk found out about the stranger’s intention, they unanimously tried to dissuade him. But, despite their best efforts, they failed.
“Dear concerned friends,” argued the stranger, “I’m tired of this life and
have no regrets. I yearn for a challenge; I don’t mind the physical damage. To
leave this world would be sweet for me, just like a bird who’s been freed from
his cage.”
People tried to change his mind, reminding him of the tortuous pain
that might be awaiting him in the mosque. They reasoned that to embark on
a heroic course may at fi rst seem like a simple choice, yet once fully engaged,
the diffi culties of the path will become all too clear; they told him that he’d
be sorry. However, he turned a deaf ear to them. They pleaded with him to
give up his crazy idea and not to tarnish the reputation of their town and its
citizens any further with yet another murder. But he had no ears to heed their
appeals.
“I’m not like a skittish housecat who buckles under at the fi rst signs
of fear! I’ve given up on my life. I’m afraid of nothing, and if I lose my life
tonight, so be it; I’ve achieved my purpose,” insisted the brave heart.
The townsfolk slowly began to disperse, realizing that their words were
having no effect. Reluctantly, they prepared themselves to confront the man’s 
107
cold corpse the next day, and they each went their own way. Meanwhile, the
man walked into the mosque, holding his head high against what might come.
His head, however, had nevertheless been cluttered with the townspeople’s
warnings, and no matter how hard he tried he couldn’t fall asleep. So, he sat
in a corner, his back propped up against a pillar, and watched the darkness.
Midnight was upon him, and he had not yet heard or seen any monster
or devil; he began to think that all he’d been told about the mosque had been
lies or the product of the townsfolk’s overspirited imaginations. Right at that
very moment, he was jerked into reality by a piercing holler directed at him,
declaring that in a blink of an eye his entire being would be overtaken. Any
sane person would faint or collapse or even lurch into cardiac arrest, but not
the fearless stranger, who had already bade farewell to his life on earth.
“This is nothing! It’s the hollow sound of a drum declaring the arrival
of Eid!” he shouted out confi dently. “To the faithless, it may sound like the
trumpet of death, but for those of us who believe in God, it’s the sound of
celebration! Why should I fear the drum of Eid? I shall enter the ring and
either give up my life or leave victorious.”
He got up from his corner and stood in the middle of the mosque, crying
out: “Here I am! Can you see me? I’ve nothing to lose, I’ve given up everything.
If you’re brave enough, show your face and let’s have it all out!”
With those words, the mosque’s spell was broken; instantly, the ceiling
cracked open and a stream of gold coins cascaded onto the mosaic fl oor. The
man was stunned as he watched the unimaginable treasure pile up before him.
After a few minutes, when he regained his composure, he ran about in search
of empty sacks, which he found in one of the side rooms, and began to fi ll
them up with the coins. It took him the rest of the night, but he managed to
collect every single coin he could locate.
Unlike the cowards who had lost their lives in the Guest Killer Mosque,
and much to the regret of the unbelieving townsfolk who had no trust in their
hearts, the stranger became supremely rich, spending his wealth generously
until his last living days.
108
Camel and Drummer Boy
I
n the Persian countryside, farmers used to teach their sons how to play the
drums to scare away birds and other small animals that might otherwise
threaten their crops. Young boys spent entire days and nights in the fi elds and
played their drums to their hearts’ delight. One of the drummer boys had
been learning the skill since he was so small he could barely hold the instrument in his hands. He loved the sound as well as the motion of his fi ngers
as he caressed the drum’s skin. He also took delight in frightening the birds,
especially when they all took fl ight simultaneously.
Sultan Mahmood, the ruler of the land, was quite fond of waging wars.
He arrived with his massive army and set up camp close to the boy’s family
farm. Alongside the usual war-making equipment, the soldiers also brought a
camel who carried their enormous war drum. The army’s drummer thumped
on the noisy instrument during times of war, day in and day out, without a
break. Consequently, the camel was almost completely deaf and could hear
nothing other than the sound of the great war drum. As the sultan’s vast army
spread its camp across the land, the camel happily strolled farther and farther
away from his keeper, grazing on the fresh green grasses that he rarely had a
chance to enjoy.
The morning after the army’s arrival, the young farm boy left for work as
usual, but a surprise awaited him—a camel, contently nibbling on his family’s
crops. He was quick to react. He picked up his drum and began to thump on
it as hard and as fast as he could. On and on he drummed, and the sound carried for miles until everyone working in the fi elds could hear him. The camel,
though, in its deafness, continued to calmly eat with great appetite, destroying
the valuable crop of the boy’s family.
When the boy’s drumming had continued ceaselessly for hours, an exasperated farmer working nearby decided to walk over and fi nd out the reason
for all the clamor. When he found the boy and saw the camel close by, he fi gured out the problem. He walked over and knelt down beside the boy, putting
his arm around the boy’s weary shoulders.
“My young lad, are you drumming to scare away the camel?”
109
The boy nodded without interrupting his loud playing.
“You know that this camel belongs to the army, don’t you?” the farmer
asked.
The boy nodded again as he continued to play.
“Do you also know that he carries their enormous war drum? And have
you seen the size of this drum?” The farmer spread his arms wide to replicate
the breadth of the massive instrument. “This poor beast’s ears are numb to
the sound of your small, delicate drum, my dear. He probably hasn’t heard a
beat!” he told the boy gently. “Not every drum scares away every animal, and
yours is not suited to drive away anything other than small birds and rabbits!”
The boy listened attentively and immediately stopped playing, realizing
the futility of his effort. Silence fi nally spread over the fi elds, and the farmers
could resume their work in peace.
110
The Chickpeas
On market day, a woman went shopping and came back with a big bag of
chickpeas, which she intended to use to make several kinds of salad, dip,
and soup. She cleaned the chickpeas, rinsing them well and then soaking them
for several hours before boiling them slowly in a big cauldron.
As soon as the pot began to boil, the chickpeas started bouncing up and
down, screaming: “You’ve bought us, we’re yours, why set us on fi re now?”
“It’s time for you to boil, so stay quiet and be patient. I must cook you
properly, until you’re ready to be added to my best dishes,” she asserted knowingly. “When you were growing in the fi elds you were amply nourished, but
now it’s time to put up with some hardship. You know that your ultimate
purpose is to become nourishment for the spirit not just the body! That’s how
in the end you’ll reap your greatest rewards.”
The chickpeas slowly stopped bouncing around and quieted down,
resigned to the fact that if they wanted to be part of the grand scheme of life,
they would have to forfeit their material existence and trust in the guidance
of their mistress.
111
The Mosquito and the Wind
I
t was the day of the week when Soleiman the prophet, who spoke the language of animals, customarily held court and heard the complaints of his
subjects, whether they be man or beast. A mosquito had fl own a long way to
the city to see Soleiman and ask for his intervention to save his species.
“Great prophet, you are the most just ruler; you deal fairly and equally
with every creature who comes to you, no matter if it’s human, fairy, fi sh, or
bird!” began the tiny mosquito. “I implore you to save us and grant us back
our meadows and prairies. You solve everyone’s problems, but you know how
small and weak we mosquitoes are; in fact, we’re renowned for it. While you’re
praised for your strength and greatness, we’re unrivaled in our meekness. We’re
desperate for your positive judgment for us to survive.”
“All right, little mosquito, whom are you complaining about?” Soleiman
demanded. “Who’s dared to injure you at a time when I’m still the ruler of
this land? The day I was born, cruelty was ended! Mercilessness is rooted in
the darkness of ignorance; when my sun is shining, how can darkness exist? I’ve
been sent here by God to solve your problems so that you don’t disturb Him
every other minute. So, tell me, what seems to be your problem?”
“My complaint is directed at the wind! The wind is enduringly and irrevocably cruel to us, and we’re fed up.”
“All right, but God has ordered me to always listen to both sides of any
argument. So I must ask the wind to be present as well to defend itself. It’s
God’s rule, and I can’t change it. So go and bring the wind back with you.”
“But the wind is my enemy! Perhaps, would you be kind enough to summon it yourself ?”
Soleiman beckoned the wind in the far distance: “The mosquito has a
complaint about you; come forth quickly and defend yourself,” he ordered.
The wind immediately changed direction and headed toward Soleiman’s
court. Straightaway, the mosquito made a move to disappear.
112
“Where are you off to?” Soleiman asked, surprised. “I must judge with
both of you present.”
“Great prophet, the wind’s presence inevitably means my death! It’s
because of this wind that I have become homeless and destitute. That’s why I
came to you in the fi rst place. There’s only ever room for me, or for the wind!”
Before the wind entered the court of Soleiman, the mosquito had already
fl own miles away in the opposite direction, a little wiser about not challenging
an opponent who’s in an entirely different league.
MaSNaVi�iV
114
Praying Only for Sinners
I
n a remote town in Persia, there once lived a kind and respected holy man
who was adored by everyone. However, there was a problem with him! He
only prayed for criminals, murderers, and other sinners, beseeching:
Oh God, the Benevolent!
I implore You to never stop bestowing
Your boundless compassion
Upon the poor sinners of this world!
In his sermons, he almost never had kind words for those who were
renowned for their charitable acts and had helped the poor and needy all their
lives. One day, a group who attended his services regularly began to reproach
him, telling him that his manner of prayer was uncommon and unappreciated
by most of those present. The preacher responded to their complaint quite
simply:
“Throughout my life, I’ve been the inadvertent recipient of many blessings because of the crimes committed by these unruly men. By the sheer evil
of their actions, they’ve shown me right from wrong. Every single time I’ve
turned my attention to worldly affairs, I’ve been witness to their immense
cruelty; thus, I sought refuge in our Creator. Consequently, their evil actions
have guided me to the greater good. It is imperative for me to pray for their
salvation!”
People are forever complaining to God about their pains and the unfairness they experience in their lives. Meanwhile, God invariably tells His wailing
subjects that it’s that very same pain that will eventually lead them to His
door. Our friends are indeed our worst enemies, for they remove us from His
company by distracting us with the minutia of their own personal affairs.
Truly, every enemy can be our cure and balm, for in order to avoid them we
must seek the help of the One who has created us all.
115
The Most Diffi cult Thing in the World
J
esus of Nazareth was often presented with deeply profound queries from
common people, and his answers frequently proved to be life changing for
them. One day, an agitated man approached him hurriedly, waving to catch
his attention.
“Please, great prophet, help me.” The man panted heavily as he reached
the place where Jesus had stopped. “What is the most diffi cult thing in the
world to encounter?”
“God’s wrath,” Jesus replied instantly.
“How can we avoid it?”
“By suppressing your anger.”
The man dropped his gaze and nodded gratefully. With no need to
further explain the matter, seeing that the man had thoroughly grasped its
essence, Jesus continued on to his destination.
116
The Sufi and His Cheating Wife
There was a Sufi who was a hard-working and honest shopkeeper who
loved his wife; he felt that he would go to the ends of the earth for her.
For some time, though, he had grown suspicious of her but was feeling guilty
about his suspicions at the same time. One day he decided to go home earlier
than usual. On that day, however, his beautiful wife had arranged for her lover
to pay her a quick visit. When the Sufi opened the front door of his house,
she was in the arms of the local peddler, lost in love and lust.
He slammed the door shut as he entered, barring any way out for a possible intruder. The lovers froze on the spot, unable to think of a way out.
The Sufi , who possessed valuable foresight, decided not to make a scene and
to maintain his wife’s good reputation in the neighborhood, as he was still
very much in love with her. While he was quickly strategizing an appropriate
response, his cunning wife came up with a rescue plan. She quickly disguised
the peddler under one of her veils, pretending that she was entertaining a
visitor, in fact a woman inquiring on behalf of a suitor for their unmarried
daughter.
The truth didn’t escape the Sufi , but he had already made up his mind and
decided to play along with his wife. “What service can we do for the revered
lady?” he asked shrewdly.
“She’s come to ask for our daughter’s hand and would like to see her, but
she’s at school right now. The lady’s son is a competent businessman but is out
of town at the moment; that’s why he’s not accompanying her,” the wife was
quick to reply.
“It seems to me that this lady is grand and rich! Why would she want
to marry her son to our poor daughter?” the man asked, feigning ignorance.
“We’re certainly not in the same class of society as her family! It’s like building a doorframe with wood on one side and ivory on the other. When couples
are not on the same social level, their marriage will not last long!” asserted
the Sufi .
117
“I told her exactly the same thing, but she says that they have enough
wealth to last them a few lifetimes and that what they’re searching for is honesty and virtue in a girl, which are treasures both in this life and the next!”
“Well, she can see how destitute we are. Our daughter has no dowry, and
her greatest asset is indeed her chastity and honesty, which is obvious to God
and not dependent on my judgment!” he said, hoping that his words would
be imprinted on the cheating partners’ consciences without him having to
disgrace them publicly.
118
The Tanner in the Perfume Bazaar
I
t had been a long, hot day, and the tanner had worked nonstop to fi nish all
the orders he had received. As sunset approached, he felt more exhausted
than usual; all he wanted was to go home, get a bite to eat, then lie down for
an extended sleep. He locked up the tannery and began his long walk home,
but as he was utterly drained, he uncharacteristically took a wrong turn and
ended up in the perfume section of the bazaar.
As soon as he smelled the fragrant scents lingering in the air, his head
went into a spin, and he passed out lifelessly on the fl oor. Passersby quickly
gathered around, trying to help in any way they could. One rubbed his
stomach gently while another sprinkled rose water on his face so that he
would breathe in the heavenly scent. Someone else caressed his hands, while
yet another rubbed his temples gently. A thoughtful shopkeeper quickly
made him an infusion of various medicinal herbs, and his assistant helped
remove the man’s several layers of clothing. A concerned man took his pulse,
while another smelled his breath for any sign of wine or hashish. Others
stood around wondering how he could remain alive while looking so completely inanimate!
Eventually they discovered who he was and sent for his relatives. He
had an astute brother who lived not far from the bazaar, and once he heard
what had happened, he wasted no time getting to the scene. On the way, he
quietly gathered a small heap of dog feces in the handkerchief that he always
carried in his pocket. Arriving at the bazaar, he pushed folks away and managed to get to his brother’s side while quietly reminding himself, “When
one knows the illness, it’s simple to fi nd the cure! From dawn to dusk my
brother labors in the tannery, surrounded by foul smells. When one falls ill,
his only cure is that to which he’s addicted. He’s become sick because he’s
been exposed to the unfamiliar. His cure is dog shit not rose water!”
Unwilling to let the crowd discover what the actual cure was, the
brother gently scattered the onlookers away from the supine tanner while 
119
expertly drawing the handkerchief out of his sleeve and shoving it toward
his brother’s nose. As he bent over him, pretending to be whispering in his
ear, he let him breath in the foul odor for a few minutes. Slowly, the tanner
opened his eyes and began to move his limbs. People gasped in awe, thinking that the brother had used magic to bring the tanner back from the dead.
Little did they know that the magic was nothing more than what the tanner
was already quite used to—a foul stench!
120
Jump Off the Roof
Ali, the prophet’s son-in-law and most trusted companion, was having a
heated conversation with a Jewish man who did not believe in the Moslem God. Standing on a high rooftop overlooking the city, the Jew turned to
face Ali and asked him: “Are you one hundred percent certain that your Allah
irrevocably protects you at all times?”
“I’ve no doubt. In fact, I believe that I’ve been under His protection from
the moment I was conceived in the womb!”
“If you want to prove to me that you have absolute faith in your God,
then demonstrate that by jumping off this roof!”
“Be quiet,” snapped Ali. “Before you choke on your words, you’d better
stop! It’s not for you or me to test God! We have no right to do so; it is only
God who can test His servants, at any moment He chooses. Indeed, He tests
us regularly to show us the extent of our devotion and faith.”
The Jewish man had nothing more to say; he quietly left Ali’s side and
climbed down from the roof, pondering his own faith.
121
Mud Eaters
I
n the old times, there was a strange illness that had no apparent cause
and no known cure, namely mud eating. People affl icted with this unfortunate condition could exercise no control over their behavior. Whenever
they chanced upon even the smallest amount of mud, in whatever location,
they couldn’t stop themselves from scooping it into their mouths and swallowing it.
Mud eaters, however, also had to eat other foods to survive, and sugar
cubes happened to be the favorite treat of one such affl icted person. One day,
this man entered a small grocery shop in his neighborhood and asked the
shopkeeper for a quarter kilo of sugar cubes. The shopkeeper, who was an
astute businessman and knew about his customer’s predicament, showed him
the weights he used on his scale, secretly trying to tempt him.
“I use mud weights on my scale, just so you know! I’ll be back in a jiffy,”
he said, inventing a reason to step out momentarily. “Give me a minute to
fetch the whole sugar cone to chip your half kilo.”
He turned around and went into the storage room at the back of the
shop, making sure to take his time.
“This isn’t simply mud!” the mud eater began to fantasize. “To me, this is
more beautiful than any fl ower, more delicious than the fi nest pastry.”
Delighted that the shopkeeper had left the room and hoping that he
would take his time coming back, the mud eater eyed the weight delectably and snatched it in his fi ngers the moment he thought the other man
couldn’t see. He began to lick the clump of mud and nibble off small bites,
savoring each one, no longer concerned about being caught in the act. He
simply couldn’t stop himself and no longer cared about risking his reputation. Meanwhile, the shopkeeper secretly watched his customer from behind
a curtain.
“You’re such a fool, you think you’re cheating me, while you’re only stealing from yourself!” the shopkeeper whispered silently to himself. “You’re 
122
worried that I may reappear too quickly, before you’ve sated yourself, while
I’m hoping that you eat your heart out! The more you eat, the less sugar I’ll
have to part with.”
Even though each man was cheating the other, neither was aware that in
fact they were cheating themselves, by being dishonest to a brother for the
mere love of material.
123
The Darvish and the Firewood Gatherer
I
t was a cold and windy night, and a novice darvish had gone to bed early. In
a dream, he found himself in the company of great Sufi s and was quick to
take advantage of his fortune. He implored the great men for advice on how
to conduct his life honorably without creating bad karma. In their infi nite
wisdom, the masters imparted the great secret of the magical mountain, where
fruit of all kinds grew on trees and one could subsist on them freely for life.
Without exerting much effort, the darvish soon found the mountain
and discovered the delectable fruit of the trees, which were in abundance
everywhere. Much to his surprise, the fruits were not only sweet but also
transformed his speech in such a manner that when he spoke, people were
mesmerized by him. He was content that he’d never have to worry about his
livelihood again.
One day, the darvish went to a nearby stream to wash. As he took off his
coat, he felt two silver coins that he had sewn into the hem of his jacket long
ago while he was still a working man. Almost instantly he noticed an old man
in the distance carrying a heap of fi rewood on his bent back walking toward
him. He thought, as I no longer need the silver, why don’t I give these coins
to this poor man; perhaps he can nourish his dilapidated body a little. But
before the darvish could fi nish his thought, the old man was standing before
him, his eyes ablaze!
Unbeknown to the young darvish, the old man was a high Sufi master
who could read thoughts. He threw his enormous stack of fi rewood in front
of the darvish, infl icting the fear of God on him. Quietly the old man whispered something inaudible, but the darvish nevertheless understood him. He
was reproaching the darvish for belittling him, thinking that he was so worthless as to be deserving of alms. The old man, obviously offended, raised his
arms, turning to the sky:
“My God, only You know who Your special devotees are and what precious gifts they are to this world. So please, for our sake, use Your alchemy to
turn this stack of wood into gold!”
124
Instantly the wood turned into pure gold, as if on fi re! The young darvish
was stunned; frozen on the spot, he was unable to move. After a while, the
old man turned to the sky again: “O God Almighty, You are the all-knowing;
for the sake of Your devoted servant, please turn this gold back to its original
form.”
The heap of gold instantly reverted to fi rewood, and the old man nimbly
lifted the pieces onto his feeble back. He began walking toward the town,
ignoring the calls of the young darvish, hoping that he had learned his lesson.
He wished that the young man might remember this encounter and never
again underestimate a working man’s efforts to earn his keep rather than relying on handouts, like some.
125
Giving Up a Kingdom
I
brahim, the ruler of Balkh, was wealthy and fair, admired by his people.
One night as he slept soundly in his palace, he was awakened by thumping
on the roof. He thought it might be his guards, chasing intruders who were
running havoc. Before he opened his eyes, he thought: “Who’d dare try to
enter my palace? Could it be a thief ? But with all these soldiers and guards
stationed all over the grounds, who’d risk his life?”
He angrily got out of bed and walked over to the window, thinking: “I
hear the guards giving chase, but no human would be foolish enough to try
to steal anything from my palace! Surely they must be djinns,” he concluded.
“Who’s out there in the dark of the night?” he screamed out the window,
as loudly and ferociously as he could.
“It’s us,” a group of men yelled back in unison.
“What are you looking for?” inquired Ibrahim, confounded.
“We’re chasing camels!” they said matter-of-factly.
“What idiots! Why would anyone chase camels on a rooftop?”
“For the same reason that you’re chasing God while lying in bed!” they
rationalized. “Is what we’re doing so much more incredible than what you’re
doing?”
When Ibrahim heard those words, he gasped in awe, reached for the fi rst
outfi t of clothing he could lay his hands on, and left his palace for good. No
one ever saw him in the province of Khorasan ever again. His name, as a great
Sufi , became renowned throughout Persia, and his story was told and retold
for years to come, inspiring visions of the mysteries of the spirit world.
126
Darvish in the Garden
I
t was a beautiful sunny morning, and a darvish left home early intending to
run a few overdue errands. Soon he found himself walking past a lush garden fi lled with fragrant roses and amazing, plentiful fruit trees. Instinctively,
he entered the garden, intending to spend a few quiet moments alone and
meditate on the beauty he had just witnessed. He found a secluded corner and
sat down, making himself comfortable on a bench in the midst of the shrubs.
Resting his head on his knee, he began to contemplate the grace of God.
A young man, who had also been mesmerized by the beauty of the
garden, walked past the darvish and thought that he had fallen asleep. He
couldn’t hold his tongue and without any consideration for the man’s privacy
approached him and began a soliloquy, accusing the darvish of shutting himself off from the magnifi cence that God had created.
“It’s a crime when you refuse to take advantage of the blessings that God
has provided us with,” the young man asserted aggressively. “What are you
doing closing your eyes to all this beauty that surrounds you? By not taking
advantage of it, you’re in fact committing an unpardonable sin!” he continued,
self-pleasingly.
The darvish slowly raised his head and knowingly gazed at the intruder
as he rambled on but kept his silence until the young man fi nally fell silent.
“The signs of the Beloved, young man, are imprinted on one’s heart, and
that’s where you should seek them,” the darvish began. “The beauties that you
speak of exist only in the outside world, while within my heart there’s no limit
to God’s glory. The trees, the fl owers, and the fruit that you see are only signs
of His creation; they’re merely a refl ection on the surface of the water,” he said
softly but assertively, lowering his head again onto his knee and shutting his
eyes as he resumed his meditation, ignoring the intruder’s presence altogether.
127
Silence Is the Reply to Fools
At the king’s court, there were many obedient and hardworking servants,
except one. Unlike the others, this servant was lazy and greedy, unable
to ever fi nish any task assigned to him. One day the king, who up to then had
been extremely tolerant, fi nally got fed up with the servant’s stupidity and
ordered the treasurer to reduce his salary drastically.
Soon it was payday, and all the servants were enthusiastically awaiting their
wages. When the stupid servant was handed his reduced amount of money,
he couldn’t believe his eyes and fl ew into a fury. Instead of fi nding out why he
had been admonished, he began to curse and blame the cook for slandering
him. The cook, who had been the one to hand him his reduced wages, told
him that he was innocent and only the messenger. “If you truly want to fi nd
the real reason for your punishment, why don’t you take a look at your own
behavior? You’ll soon discover who’s the real culprit,” he advised the servant.
The servant, however, turned a deaf ear to this good advice and sat down
to write a letter of complaint to the king. He began the letter by praising the
king, but his vicious tone did not go unnoticed. The king in his infi nite wisdom chose to ignore the letter altogether.
When the servant never received a reply, he became suspicious of the messenger to whom he had entrusted his letter and thought that he had betrayed
him. Soon again, he fl ew into a rage and cursed the messenger, making an even
greater fool of himself than before. Unwilling to give up, he wrote more letters to the king each week, all of which went unacknowledged. After several
months, one of the king’s emissaries who was familiar with the case pleaded
with the king to respond to his servant and release him from his self-infl icted
torture.
“To respond to him is easy for me and to forgive him his laziness and
stupidity, even easier,” replied the king wisely. “Yet I choose not to infest the
other servants with the same ailments that he suffers from, namely weakness
of character and absence of intelligence. Therefore, I say to thee, the answer
to fools is silence!”
128
The Large Turban
The size of a turban in the old days was indicative of a man’s valor
and stature in his society. In one small town, there was a middle-aged
teacher who didn’t have a bean to his name and went hungry most days, but
he was too proud to admit his destitution to his associates. He regularly
collected scraps from fabric shops, discarded wads of cotton, and cut-off
pieces of people’s unwanted cloaks, stuffi ng them into his modest turban
to make it look more substantial. With time, his old and dirty turban came
to resemble a sultan’s silk headdress, fooling everyone in school and buying
him much respect in town.
His students never thought for a moment that their revered master was
not who he pretended to be, and the townsfolk didn’t have a clue that when
they bowed to his apparent opulence in the street, they were honoring an
imposter. Only he knew that his good reputation was based on false pretenses—that, in fact, it was nothing but a big lie.
One early morning before sunrise, the teacher left his home and began his
daily walk to school, preparing the morning lesson in his head. Unbeknown
to him, a lowly thief was hiding behind a pillar around the corner, waiting for
his chance. As soon as he caught site of the oversized, ornate headdress of the
teacher, he thought that his opportune moment had arrived. It was well known
among thieves that people of means generally hid their money and jewels in
their turbans to keep them out of plain sight.
The thief waited patiently, confi dent that he could easily overcome the
scrawny man coming his way and eagerly anticipated his moment of victory.
As the teacher approached, in the blink of an eye the thief knocked the turban off his head, picked it up swiftly, and ran off with it. The teacher was
confused at fi rst and couldn’t gain his bearings, but soon he realized what had
happened and then chased after the thief.
“You good-for-nothing!” he screamed after him. “Look inside that turban fi rst before you rejoice! You’ll soon fi nd out what you’ve achieved! Nothing! There’s absolutely nothing worthwhile inside!” he loudly confessed.
129
The thief stopped running and pulled the turban apart to fi nd that
indeed nothing was inside but useless pieces of discarded cloth. He threw the
whole lot onto the ground, losing his temper and cursing both the teacher and
his sorry luck.
130
Intelligence
A young man was in trouble. He faced a dire problem that was consuming
his life, making him miserable company for everyone he knew. Hard as
he tried, he couldn’t fi gure out how to free himself from the web that he had,
through his own behavior, spun and entangled himself in. He took endless
walks and spent hours on end in different teashops and coffee houses, engaging with strangers, seeking advice. Despite his efforts, however, his problem
seemed unsolvable.
One day, he entered a particular coffee house for the fi rst time and
saw an older man sitting quietly in a corner. He recognized him immediately but didn’t approach him right away. Instead, he sat at a table where he
could keep the man’s profi le in view. He studied the older man with interest, remembering him as highly intelligent and a fair judge of character.
After a few long minutes, he mustered his courage and walked over to the
man’s table, asking if he could sit down for just a minute. The man looked
up from his book but did not seem very pleased at this interruption. He
nevertheless nodded, and the young man quickly sat down and immediately
posed his query. The older man was taken aback at the younger one’s candor
and shook his head thoughtfully.
“My good man, you must seek the advice of someone else, someone
who’s your friend. I’m your staunch enemy and will only misguide you. Why
would you want my advice? You need a compassionate ear, one who only wants
the best for you. You can be certain that you’ve no need for any words of
advice I may have!” he suggested honestly. “If you were sitting in the midst of
fi re but had a friend with you, you’d think you were in a rose garden! And if
you were in the middle of the most heavenly garden but were in the company
of enemies, you’d feel like you were at the epicenter of a bonfi re! So go on and
fi nd a counselor who’s your true friend.”
The older man had spoken his truth, hoping that his advice had not fallen
on deaf ears and that he would be left alone in peace now.
131
“I am well aware of your feelings toward me, sir,” admitted the younger
man. “But I’m also aware that you’re a highly intelligent person and would
never commit a wrong deed. You would, therefore, never advise another person to do so either; that’s why I trust your judgment far above my own or any
friend’s.”
132
Leadership
I
n the fi rst years, after the prophet Mohammad had originally introduced
Islam to the people of Arabia, he was forced to wage many wars to fi rmly
establish his nascent religion. Having fought in many of the battles himself, he
was well aware of the importance of a competent leader. The time had come
for yet another war, and he needed an able general. The prophet looked hard
at his options and came to a fi nal decision. His choice to lead his army was a
young soldier who had not only fought exceptionally well but had also shown
impeccable wisdom in making quick and wise decisions during battle.
Once the prophet announced his decision, one of his older companions,
unable to control his anger and jealousy, approached Mohammad to complain. He simply could not accept taking orders from a younger man.
“You’re our great messenger,” he said gravely. “I beg you to reconsider
your choice and refrain from selecting this young man! Didn’t you always say
that leadership belongs to the elders? We’ve several older soldiers who are far
more deserving of this position. Don’t look down on the yellow leaves of
trees. Remember, they symbolize maturity and are responsible for producing
ripe fruit in the end, while green shoots only signify youth and inexperience.
An older person may have a tired body, but his intelligence is incomparably
deeper than a young person’s.”
The man continued with his soliloquy, annoying the prophet more
acutely with each passing moment. The prophet tolerated the older man’s
complaints for as long as he could but eventually cut him off and tried to
reason with him.
“You only see the obvious and are blind to this young man’s superior hidden qualities!” he asserted. “There are many men whose beards have not yet
turned white but possess unrivaled qualities that their elders can only dream
of. Likewise, there are many older men with long, white, distinguished beards
whose hearts are tainted with unforgiveable sins. A commander must be intelligent; what does he want with a white beard? Isn’t Iblis, our very own devil,
the oldest man in the world? When one doesn’t have a good mind, one has 
133
nothing! Only the shortsighted consider white hair by itself to be a sign of
maturity. My dear companion, strive to detect the essence of things so you
may take command of both your faith and your mind. A wise man possesses
an innate light with which he’s able to guide and lead others; and I’m convinced that this young man has exactly that!”
Mohammad could easily have continued with his discourse but thought
better of it and stopped. He hoped that his words had penetrated the old
man’s heart and mind with suffi cient gravity so that he would never again have
to counter any soldier’s biased remarks, which could cast doubt among the
entire army.
134
Three Fish
I
n a small pond at the foot of a mountain, where the water was as clear as
the fi rst drops of a spring rainfall, there lived three incredibly beautiful fi sh.
They had swum in the pond all their lives and had never been disturbed by
predators, until one day a few men happened to walk by and spotted them.
The men quickly rummaged through their packs trying to fi nd anything
they could use to catch the fi sh. Soon they found an old fi shing net, all tangled
up, among their normally useless bits and bobs. The three fi sh watched the
men as they hurried about their business noisily but didn’t guess their intention and continued swimming around calmly.
One of the fi sh, however, who was more intelligent than the other two,
became suspicious and thought it best to leave the pond as soon as possible,
without confi ding in his friends. He reasoned that if he shared his intention
with the other two, they’d try to dissuade him, as they were excessively attached
to their home and old ways and might be unwilling to give them up. He had
made up his mind, though, and was prepared to bear the consequences to save
himself from what appeared to be their imminent demise.
Without further delay, the wise fi sh took a leap and braved the fast current that fl owed out from the pond, following a stream that ultimately poured
into a vast sea, the opposite shore too far distant to be visible. Once he found
himself in the warm waters of the sea, he felt free at last; he could swim endlessly without having to circle around time and time again, like in a fi shbowl.
His new life was good, and he was thrilled that he had believed in himself and
taken a chance on the unknown.
Meanwhile, the men continued to untangle their net, preparing to cast it
into the pond. The second fi sh realized that she had wasted precious time and
that her luck might have run out, so she began to conjure up an escape route
as fast as she could. Initially, she blamed herself for not having followed her
wise friend, who was now probably swimming free in the ample sea. Quickly,
though, she stopped herself from dwelling on her mistake, as she knew that
when the past is gone, it’s gone! She could think of no plan of escape other 
135
than pretending to be dead. So she rolled onto her back and, with her belly
facing up toward the sky, fl oated on the surface of the water weightlessly.
The compliant water carried the seemingly dead fi sh gently on its ripples,
up and down and around the pond. When the men saw the dead fi sh, they
comforted each other that, although it was a shame to lose one, they should be
grateful that they’d been spared dealing with a sick fi sh that was going to die
anyway as soon as caught. One of the men grabbed the tail of the apparently
dead fi sh as she fl oated on her back in front of him and threw her onto dry
land. Without delay, the suddenly resurgent fi sh gathered all her might and
fl ipped over and over behind the men’s backs until she fi nally found her way
to the fast-moving stream that eventually took her to the salty sea. Free at last,
she swam with all her strength to get as far away as possible from the shore,
hoping to never again lay eyes on another human being.
The third fi sh, however, was stupid. In a frenzy, he fl opped around and
around in circles, hoping to evade his captors as they watched from the bank.
He proved easy to catch, however; the men simply threw their net over him
and in no time had him roasting on a fi re. Unbeknown to the men, while
burning inside out, the fi sh kept repeating to himself, knowing well that it was
much too late for regrets: “If I could have a next time, I’d pay closer attention
to my wise friends and aim for the sea, which I’d make my home and forsake
this lonesome pond forever.”
136
I Am God
Bayazid of Bastam was a supreme Sufi master with many followers and
devotees. He was famous for his seemingly mad utterances, which erupted
from him when he went into trance. Those who knew him well and loved him
unconditionally were familiar with his unusual states of mind and turned a
blind eye to his peculiarities, letting him exaggerate as much as he liked.
One fi ne spring day Bayazid was in the company of his favorite students and felt exceptionally jolly, impatient to begin the sama. Often while
he whirled, he would experience highly charged states of mind, shrieking and
repeating words that were incomprehensible to the others present. That day,
his followers noticed that he was overexcited and that his actions were especially unusual. His mood was also somehow different from the other times
when he became engrossed in spiritual rituals; nevertheless, they didn’t allow
themselves to become concerned.
The sama started with the familiar sound of the reed, and before long
Bayazid went into his trance as he whirled. “I am God!” he began to shout.
“And there’s no other God but me!”
His devotees were fl abbergasted, not knowing what to make of their master; for this was the fi rst time they’d heard him uttering such unmistakably
blasphemous words. However, already accustomed to his frequently unusual
behavior, they didn’t think too much of it. The next morning, though, they
told Bayazid what he’d said the previous evening.
“If I ever utter those words again, you have my permission to stab me
repeatedly,” he ordered. “In fact, kill me on the spot!”
The murids took Bayazid’s words literally, and each decided to carry a
knife in his belt at all times, just in case. The following week, they all gathered
for yet another session of sama. Bayazid, as usual, became entirely overcome
with excitement and began to whirl speedily, forgetting his instructions to his
devotees of the week before. Soon he was in an exceptional trance and began
to repeat: “I am God, I am God.”
This time, his enthusiasm had no limits; the broad implications of his
words rose to another level. Round and round he whirled, loudly praying all 
137
the while. “Under my shirt, lives God!” Bayazid shouted. “Why do you search
for him on the earth or even in the sky?”
The devotees found themselves at an impasse; they didn’t want to stab
their shaykh, yet they didn’t want to disobey him either. Eventually, one by
one, they pounced on Bayazid and began to thrust their daggers toward his
body. One murid aimed for his throat to shut him up, while another went for
his heart, and yet another plunged his dagger toward Bayazid’s side, trying to
make sure that the man was as good as dead.
However, an odd sort of miracle occurred. With each forward thrust, the
knife inexplicably spun around and stabbed the devotee instead of Bayazid.
Each attempted blow at the master became an even more severe wound suffered by the murid wielding the knife, and in a few short minutes corpses piled
around the room. There were a few men present who, despite their master’s
earlier order, had not had the heart to stab him. They stood by in a state of
utter bewilderment, their tongues tied, watching the massacre! Their faith and
trust in their shaykh, and perhaps the softness of their hearts, were what saved
them.
From that day on, people from faraway lands would come to sit at the
foot of Bayazid, to be in the presence of God.
138
The Bird’s Advice
A beautiful bird was chirping happily on a branch when, all of a sudden,
she felt a heavy cloud pressing her down to the ground. A cunning huntsman had managed to trap the stunning little bird in a net. Flapping around,
she was unable to free herself from the man’s snare. Quickly she assessed her
dire situation and came up with a clever solution. She pleaded with her captor:
“O great hunter, you must have captured many impressive beasts in your
time and feasted on innumerable cows, sheep, and other delicious animals.
Yet none of them seem to have appeased your hunger. Let me assure you that
neither will my tiny body with its minuscule amount of fl esh. Allow me to
offer you three pieces of advice that are far more valuable than my worth as
simple prey.”
The hunter was unsure of the bird’s intention and whether he could trust
her. The little bird felt his uncertainty and was quick to add:
“I assure you that you will reap infi nite riches using these three precious
bits of advice. I will give you the fi rst counsel while still in your grip, and if
you like it, then I will tell you the second one from the roof of your hut. The
third and most important one I will impart to you from that tree,” she said as
she pointed with her beak toward a nearby poplar.
The hunter was still not convinced but reluctantly agreed as he saw that,
truly, the little bird was not enough to feed even one member of his large family. The bird, still in the man’s grip, offered her fi rst suggestion:
“My fi rst advice to you, my good sir, is to never believe the impossible
from anyone.”
The hunter kept his word and released the little bird, who fl ew to the
rooftop.
“The second advice is to never regret the past. When something is in the
past, it’s never coming back.”
The man, waiting to hear the third piece of advice, watched the bird as
she fl ew to the top of the tree.
139
“Inside my stomach, there’s a rare pearl that weighs a hundred grams!” she
said nonchalantly. “You’ve lost your only chance of ever owning it! Obviously,
it wasn’t meant for you; otherwise, you could have fed your entire family for
the rest of their days.”
As the hunter heard these words, he began to wail and sob like a woman
in labor.
“Didn’t I tell you to never regret the past?” the bird rebuked him. “Are you
deaf, or did you simply not hear me? My other advice was to never believe the
impossible. How could a pearl weighing a hundred grams be in my tiny body
when I don’t even weigh ten grams myself ?”
The man pulled himself together and wiped the tears in his eyes, and
sheepishly asked the bird for her third piece of advice.
“You’ve got to be mad to ask me for more!” exclaimed the bird. “Why
would I impart a third secret when I’ve seen how poorly you’ve put the other
two to use?”
She prepared to fl y away, but before she did she called back to her captor:
“To impart advice to the foolish is like trying to grow crops in a salt
fi eld!”
140
Child on the Roof
A woman, beside herself with emotion, rushed into Imam Ali’s modest
home. Hardly able to breathe, she fell to her knees.
“O savior, I beg of you to help me!” she pleaded. “My one and only child
has climbed onto the roof and gotten stuck in the gutter and will not come
down, no matter how much I beg him. I’m frightened that he may fall, and I’ll
lose him forever. He’s the light of my eyes, but he’s too young to understand
reason. I even pointed to my breasts so that maybe he’ll climb down for milk,
but he turned his face away.”
Her tears prevented her from continuing as she choked on her words. Ali
let her sob freely, conscious that her hysterical condition was not going to be
helpful to her son. After a few long minutes, the woman calmed down. She
looked up at Ali’s kind face; he was watching her intently, his eyes fi lled with
compassion.
“I’m at my wit’s end, my lord,” the woman whined. “Tell me what to do.”
“Now that you’ve calmed down, my good woman, listen carefully,” Ali
began softly. “Go and fi nd another child nearly the same age as your son and
send him up to the roof. When your son sees the other boy, in whom he will
see a resemblance to himself, he will walk over to him. I promise you, like
prefers like. We’re always attracted to those who are similar to us. Your boy
will soon be safe.”
The woman did not lose a beat and ran out the door in search of such a
boy. In no time, her son was saved, voluntarily walking over to his new friend
and climbing down the stairs together to safety.
141
The King and the Servant
The king was gripped with wrath at one of his servants who had committed an unforgivable mistake. He instinctively drew his sword to behead
the poor man. No one in the court stepped forward to intermediate, as they
all believed that the man’s fate was now sealed. No one dared ask the king to
forgive the young man, except Emadal-Molk.
When Emad, one of the king’s most trusted and respected ministers,
knelt before the ruler and asked for leniency for the servant, the king immediately withdrew his outthrust sword. He ordered the servant to retreat to his
quarters and not to appear before him until his anger had subsided.
The servant, however, instead of thanking Emad for saving his life, began
to act strangely after the incident. Like most others in the court, he had always
adored Emad, but after the incident, he avoided the kind man. Soon, he even
stopped greeting Emad when they crossed paths at court.
One day, a courtier asked the servant out of curiosity the reason for his
odd behavior: “Why do you act so ungraciously toward someone who has
literally saved your neck?”
“I didn’t ask Emad to save my life!” retorted the servant. “My life doesn’t
belong to him to save! It belongs to the king, and he can take it or give it back
when he chooses. In that instant when the king wanted to slash my throat, I
was willing to give up my life. I wanted to become nothing before him. Ah,”
he sighed, “to have simply been nothing before that king of kings! But Emad
took that chance away from me, and I shall never be able to regain that glory!”
142
Ants and Calligraphy
The ants left their colony late one morning and, uncharacteristically, took
a left turn instead of continuing along their usual route straight ahead.
Soon they found themselves walking on a white sheet of paper that someone
was writing on. Astonished by the beauty of the script, a young ant, who could
not see the fi ngers holding the pen, turned to the older ones and exclaimed:
“Look at this beauty! See how breathtaking these incredible shapes are that
this pen is creating! I never knew that forms could look so astonishing!”
An older ant, who had seen a little more of the world, replied knowingly:
“This beauty is the work of the fi ngers that are holding the pen. The pen isn’t
the originator of this masterpiece, the hand is.”
“You are both wrong!” a third ant interrupted. “This is the work of the
arm. Just look at those skinny, bony fi ngers. How could they ever create such
a chef d’oeuvre?”
Gradually more ants joined them, all eager to offer their opinions. Their
leader, who was known for his superior intelligence, fi nally declared: “Don’t
believe that this work belongs to the realm of matter, because all matter vanishes with age like a dream. Material things are meant for physical life, but
forms are originally created out of intelligence and spirit.”
Unbeknown to even the wise leader, beyond intelligence and spirit, ultimately an act of God is necessary for anything to become manifest.
143
The Crow and the Grave
Cain had mercilessly killed his brother Abel and was carrying the corpse
on his shoulders, unable to decide how and where to hide the body so
he wouldn’t be caught out by his parents, Adam and Eve. Never before had he
been faced with such a daunting task, and now he felt lost. Looking around
him as he bore the weight of the corpse, he tried to come up with a solution,
but his mind was too limited to be of much use.
It was late, and the sky was turning dark; Cain felt that his chance to
resolve the situation was rapidly disappearing, when he spotted a crow fl ying low toward him. At fi rst, he thought it was a hallucination, but then as
the crow fl ew closer, Cain could clearly see that he was carrying what seemed
like a dead crow in his beak. Gracefully, the bird circled in the air, and just as
gracefully he landed nearby. Slowly and gently, he let the dead crow roll out
of his beak onto the ground, and he proceeded to dig into the earth with his
powerful claws. Once the hole was deep enough, the crow used his beak to
push the corpse in and began to cover the dead bird with the soil he had dug
up only a few moments earlier.
Cain watched the crow in utter amazement, wondering how it was possible that a simple, common bird could be so much smarter than he was!
Immediately he followed the bird’s example and buried his slain brother in the
ground, leaving no trace behind for his parents to ever stumble upon.
Unbeknown to Cain, people need guidance in almost all tasks they face
on earth, and the simple crow had been assigned to teach this lowest of acts:
grave digging.
144
MaSNaVi�V
146
The Famished Dog
An Arab man was hunched over by the side of the road next to a dying
dog, weeping grievously. Another Arab walked by and saw him.
“Why are you wailing like this?” he asked empathetically.
“I’m grief stricken for my dog,” replied the sobbing man. “He was an
excellent companion, but he’s dying now. He fetched my food in the daytime
and guarded my home at night. He had a quick eye and was a fi erce hunter,
scaring away any thief who dared approach our home.”
“What’s his problem now? Is he injured?”
“No, his problem is hunger!” confessed the owner. “He’s so hungry that
he can’t move anymore.”
“May God grant you patience. May you fi nd another worthy dog like this
one again,” commiserated the passerby.
The two men watched the poor dog as he continued to pant and whimper. The passerby suddenly noticed a large bag next to the Arab’s foot and
asked him: “What’s in the bag?”
“Oh, nothing much, just the leftover food from my meal last night. I’m
taking it home so it can nourish my body again tonight.”
“You must have some dry bread in there. Why don’t you give it to the
poor dog?”
“Hold on, I don’t have that much affection for him!” replied the Arab,
sounding quite surprised. “I fi nd it hard to part with anything before I get
paid for it fi rst. But then again, tears are free!”
“What kind of a human being are you?” exclaimed the man. “The place
for you is in hell itself! How could you even begin to imagine that a loaf of
bread is more valuable than a single teardrop? Don’t you know that our tears
are the sorrows of our heart manifested into visible drops?”
The owner of the dog watched the other Arab walk away shaking his
head in disbelief but sadly could not comprehend the magical piece of wisdom he had just been offered.
147
Peacock
A physician was taking a walk one day in the lush meadows behind his
home when he spotted a beautiful male peacock in the distance. Curious to see the peacock up close, he carefully made his way toward the bird.
Squinting his eyes to focus better and make sure he wasn’t mistaken, the man
saw that the bird was cruelly pulling out his sublime feathers with his beak and
spitting them as far away from himself as he could. The man was perplexed
and decided to investigate, so slowly he approached the bird.
“Hello, heavenly creature! What are you doing pulling out those exquisite
feathers of yours?” he asked softly, keeping his voice low but unable to hide
his concern. “How can you accept in your heart to destroy such beauty? Your
feathers are admired around the world. Those who memorize the Koran use
them as bookmarks, and noblemen use them to fan themselves in hot weather.
Are you aware who it was that created your unrivalled glory? How can you
throw away God’s gift so ungraciously?”
As the wise man spoke his mind, hoping that the peacock had a good
listening ear, he realized that perhaps he had been too rash in questioning the
bird in the fi rst place. Perhaps he had also been too quick to offer his advice;
every activity has its own designated time and place, and he had not respected
this fundamental reality. Nevertheless, he could hardly conceal his anguish as
he watched the bird continue his plucking.
“Get away from me,” exclaimed the peacock, clearly annoyed. “You’re still
distracted by my superfi cial beauty! Can’t you see that it’s because of these
feathers that I’ve had to bear so much pain? Every time I turn around, there’s
a hunter stalking me. I can’t protect myself from harm; I’m large in size,
but truly I’m quite weak. If I can’t repel danger, then I may as well make
myself look as unseemly as possible! I want to be able to roam anywhere I
choose, peacefully and without fear. These feathers are the cause of my egotism, they’ve brought me much unnecessary harm. It’s time for me to be rid of
all such ornaments! If anyone can understand, it’s God!”
The peacock resumed plucking the remaining feathers, ignoring the man,
who continued to stand by watching in silence as his tears fl owed uncontrollably.
148
The Ready Lover
A young couple had fallen in love but, due to unforeseen circumstances,
had lost touch with each other for almost a year. Not having spoken a
word the entire time, they were almost at the end of their tether when one day,
by chance, they came face to face in a rose garden.
“My darling, I can’t believe my eyes!” gasped the boy, almost out of breath.
“I’ve been heartbroken and lost without you. Life’s been nothing but hell; my
tears have dried up altogether. I’ve endured more hardship than I can fathom.”
He went on and on without letting the girl utter a single word. He was
so engrossed in his story of self-pity that his eyes glistened with selfi sh tears!
The girl listened to him patiently until she found an opportunity to speak.
“You’ve done everything, my dear, except the main thing,” she told him
sadly.
“What could that possibly be?” asked the young man, fl abbergasted.
“You’ve clutched vainly at issues that are only secondary and given up on
the main issue, which is understanding the essence of love!”
“What’s the essence of love?” he asked, confused.
“Nothingness!”
“Nothingness?” the boy blurted out, even more confused.
“Yes, my dear, you did everything you thought was proper, believing that’s
what lovers must do. But you forgot that you must be ready to die for your
love. You’re still alive, and very much so. If you’re a true lover, then die right
here before me so I know that you believe you must give up your entire being
for your love.”
When the young man heard his beloved’s words, he quietly lay down
before her feet, closed his eyes, and simply expired, bearing a wide, contented
smile on his young lips as he passed from this life.
149
Tears during Prayer
One of the fi ve pillars of Islam is prayer—done fi ve times a day—and
nothing must interfere with praying. The words spoken in prayer are the
Moslem’s tools for connecting with God and are paramount to one’s existence.
It’s imperative, during the prayer, that one’s mind doesn’t drift off and entertain thoughts other than the words of the prayer itself.
One day a man went to his mufti and asked him: “Are tears allowed during prayer?”
“Depends on the tears, my good man,” replied the mufti.
“How so?”
“If the tears have their source in the spiritual world—if they’ve sprung
forth because of a spiritual experience and one’s established a connection with
the divine—then tears are a grace! However, if they’ve sprung from some
physical pain or emotional discomfort, then they’re a distraction and indeed
may cut off one’s connection with God; such tears are certainly not welcome.”
The Moslem had his answer, thanked the mufti graciously, and left for
the mosque.
150
Charity
I
n Zarvan, a beautiful and quiet village in Yemen, there lived a pious
man who was a prosperous farmer. He was blessed with a most pleasant
demeanor and a kind heart. He was also the fairest and most generous man in
the village. Whatever he generated, whether a good crop or a profi table business transaction, he always contributed one-fi fth of it to the poor, as Islam
decreed. He never failed to remember, though, who was the ultimate provider
of his wealth.
The farmer’s home, because of his charity and benevolence, had become
a safe house for many who were down on their luck. Penniless Sufi darvishes
lived there from time to time, as well as travelers who had nowhere else to stay
when they passed through Zarvan; additionally, the village’s poorest residents
would come and go regularly when they were in need.
The farmer was famous in the region; people knew that he always separated out what he intended to distribute to the poor from what he himself
would take home for his personal needs. Out of every batch of wheat that
he harvested, he put aside one-fi fth of it for charity, and the bread he baked
with it was always distributed among the needy. The farmer was sure that,
come what may, he would maintain this altruistic routine until his dying day.
However, he was not so sure about his children, whether they would follow his
example. In fact, he was fairly certain that they wouldn’t, seeing the way they
looked at him whenever he distributed to the needy what they believed was
their personal share of his wealth.
The farmer knew instinctively that what he gave away was not simply
wealth fl owing out the door but in fact a long-term investment. He believed
that if one gave away the zakat, or one-fi fth portion, of any gain, God would
in turn guarantee a bountiful return. He was certain that sowing his seeds,
tending to his fi elds and crops every year, and working hard at his livelihood
were merely abilities that had been gifted to him, and that the true provider
of life was only God.
151
He advised his children regularly to continue his ways, but he knew that
they were against him and would never do as he wished. When it came to his
children, he was merely sowing seeds in a salt fi eld.
The farmer eventually passed away and, just as he had suspected, his
children were uncharitable with the family’s wealth and shut their door to the
needy. Soon, their farms became unyielding and were left to rot, while the
darvishes stopped passing through those parts entirely, keeping their blessed
presence far from Zarvan and its people forever.
152
Majnoun
A great many love stories have been told through all time, but the story of
Majnoun and his love for Laily is exceptionally renowned the world over.
Majnoun had fallen ill, and he knew exactly why: he had been separated
from his beloved Laily far too long. The torture of not being in her presence had demoralized Majnoun, weakening his already frail body. He coughed
incessantly and breathed only with great diffi culty, unable to eat or drink. His
friends eventually called a physician, who promised to do what he could to
restore Majnoun to health. After thoroughly examining him, the physician
announced that diphtheria had struck the lonesome lover.
“So, what’s the solution?” the friends inquired impatiently.
“I know of no other treatment but to bleed him!” decreed the doctor.
“Unless we rid him of the infected blood, he won’t even survive the night.”
Immediately, the physician sent for the local bleeder, for this procedure needed
an expert.
Majnoun, who had fallen into a semiconscious state, heard the physician’s
plan for treatment and made a great effort to sit up in his sickbed. The doctor
tried to dissuade him from expending energy while attempting to lash down
his arm with a strong piece of cloth, preparing him for the swift, razor-sharp
cuts that would initiate the bleeding procedure, but Majnoun signaled that
he wished to speak. “Leave me alone!” he yelled out as he shook his arm free.
“But my good man, you won’t survive the night!” the physician tried to
convince him.
“So be it! If my dilapidated body wishes to leave this earth, then that’s
what shall happen.”
The friends, the bleeder, and the physician, who all knew that Majnoun
had shown genuine courage in several escapades he’d been party to in the past,
wondered if he’d now lost his nerve and was afraid to be cut.
“Majnoun,” called out an old friend. “Since when are you afraid of a few
tiny cuts? You, who I know has faced down wild beasts on several occasions in
unknown lands, why be scared of this?”
153
“I’m not afraid of being cut; my entire body is in fact covered with love
cuts,” he responded dreamily. “I no longer exist, for my whole being has been
taken over by my love for Laily. I’m simply afraid that if you cut me, you might
be cutting her at the same time! Only those who are particularly sensitive can
tell that there’s no difference between Laily and me, that we’re one and the
same!”
Having spoken his mind, Majnoun turned his back on those who sought
to help him and refused to be touched, instinctively protecting the love of his
life, Laily.
154
The Water Carrier’s Donkey
I
n the past, cities did not generally have running water, and therefore a water
carrier would go from house to house to provide people with their daily
water needs. In the capital city, there was an old water carrier who owned
a donkey who’d pulled the man’s water cart faithfully all his life. The poor
beast’s back had been bent in two because of the weight he had to carry every
day, and his body was covered with untreated scabs and cuts.
His owner, not a great animal lover, did not feed the poor animal properly, because he could only afford old hay. The minute he mounted the donkey
to make him walk faster, he’d beat him heartlessly with his whip, infl icting yet
more wounds on the poor animal. The donkey, blessed with patience, obedience, and good temperament, wished every single day for God to take his life
and free him from his constant suffering.
One day as they were doing their rounds, they bumped into the water carrier’s old friend, who tended the sultan’s stables. When the man saw the sorry
state of the donkey, he was quite taken aback: “What’s the matter with him?
Why does he look so spent?”
“It’s no fault of his,” the owner was quick to reply. “He looks like this
because I can’t afford to feed him.”
“Let me take him with me to the stables and tend to him. I’ll feed him
properly and let him revive a little,” offered the friend generously.
The water carrier couldn’t be happier with the offer and parted with his
companion, hoping to pick him up the following week all plumped up and
ready to serve him again. The donkey soon found himself tied up in the sultan’s stables surrounded by beautiful, robust Arabian studs. When he realized
what a great difference there was between himself and his new stablemates, he
became disheartened and turned to God:
“Even if I’m a lowly donkey, I’m still one of Your creations! Why should
there be such a difference between me and these other four-legged relatives
of mine? Why should I suffer hunger all the time? Why should I endure pain
all night long, able to sleep only fi tfully, wishing every day that I were dead? 
155
How is it fair that these horses should live in such luxury and I be demeaned
to such misery?”
The donkey rambled on and on for quite some time, feeling utterly sorry
for himself, when all of a sudden, he heard a loud trumpet blowing outside.
A war had broken out, and the trumpet was announcing it. In the blink of an
eye, soldiers amassed inside the stable and began saddling up the Arabians,
who were in fact war horses. Soon, the donkey found himself all alone in the
grand stable, wondering what had just happened.
The next morning, the horses stumbled back, covered with deep cuts
and arrows still wedged in their fl esh, their legs loosely bandaged. A team of
veterinarians arrived on the scene; they tried their best to tend to the wounds,
hoping not to cause more harm to the sultan’s valuable steeds.
“Oh God, forgive me!” prayed the donkey, beside himself with embarrassment for his earlier self-pity. “I’m content with my poverty; at least I’ve
got security! I’ll gladly exchange the temporary comfort of these stables for my
former despicable lifestyle any day!”
The donkey was relieved to be reunited the following week with his old,
cruel owner, knowing now that nothing truly is as it seems.
156
Catching Donkeys
Pale as a sheet of thin paper, lips purple from fright, and shivering all over,
a man hurled himself through the fi rst unlocked gate he found in the
alley. The owner of the house hurried into the yard when he heard the loud
bang of the gate shutting and found his old acquaintance cowering in a corner.
“Greetings, my dear friend, what brings you here so early in the morning?”
The frightened man had not yet caught his breath and could hardly speak.
The owner’s curiosity was further aroused.
“What have you seen that has frightened you so?” he asked compassionately.
“The shameless king has ordered all donkeys in town to be confi scated!”
replied the man.
“So? If they’re catching donkeys, why are you running away? You’re not
an ass!”
“These men are very earnest and take their job seriously,” he rationalized. “However, they’re not experts and tend to make mistakes. I wouldn’t be
surprised if they were to get confused and nab the owner of the ass instead
of the ass!”
The owner of the house stared at his friend in disbelief, not knowing how
best to reply to such a comment.
157
Fear of Hunger
Sufi shaykhs, as a teaching method, would travel and take their murids, or
students, with them, believing that traveling provided the best possible
education. On one such trip, a shaykh and his murid were approaching a town
that had fallen on hard times, ravaged by famine. The murid was young and
inexperienced and had never faced a day of hunger in his life; therefore, he was
apprehensive and focused only on the hardship that awaited him.
The shaykh was an experienced Sufi who had many years of practice in
abstinence, so hunger and deprivation were hardly issues for him. Long ago
he had overcome sensual attractions, and he was not going to allow thoughts
of food to pollute his mind at this point in his life. Having a clear and pure
mind, the shaykh could easily read his murid’s obsessive thoughts and feel his
fear of hunger.
When the murid was completely overwhelmed by fear and could no longer walk in a straight line, the shaykh turned to him and said: “I understand
that the worry for bread has extinguished all your patience. You have given up
on God and no longer believe that He will look after you!” he lamented. “But
you must realize, to be hungry is to be one of God’s special servants! Hunger
is exclusive to God’s favorites, and only they can experience it. You, my dear,
don’t belong to that special group, so rest assured that you shall never suffer
for lack of food. God will make sure that there’s always plenty to feed those
who love their own stomachs, so don’t trouble yourself worrying about your
next meal!”
Having said his piece, the shaykh looked with pity at his murid, shook
his head sadly, and continued to walk toward the famine-stricken town, wondering all the while whether his words had made any sense to the young man.
158
Cow on a Green Island
There is a green island that never dries up, forever spreading lush and
bountiful. On this island lives a cow who feeds sumptuously on the
grasses and grows fatter and healthier each day. All day long, he roams the
abundant meadows and feeds without a moment’s respite until dusk. Once
darkness descends and the green can no longer be seen, the cow begins to fret.
“What am I going to eat tomorrow?” he agonizes. “Will there ever be any
food to eat again?”
He worries himself literally thin! Every night, he loses all the weight he
had put on during the previous day as he worries about the next day’s provisions. In the morning, he’s a mere shell of the cow he was the night before,
looking lanky and unkempt. He can hardly walk straight from lack of strength
and feels that it’s his last day alive.
As the sun begins to shine and the greenery again becomes apparent,
the cow cannot contain his joy. Without losing another moment, he pounces
on the grasses, which have grown through the night until they now reach the
underside of his belly, and eats as though he’d been famished for years. As
he eats, he puts back on the weight that he’d lost during the night and soon
becomes as fat and as strong as the day before. This cycle is repeated regularly;
the cow frets all night and loses weight, and the next day, when he sees the
grasses, he feeds on them and puts the weight back on.
“I spend my days grazing on this grass, but I lose all the goodness I gain
from it in the nighttime, when I worry about not fi nding any grass to eat the
next day,” the cow occasionally ponders. “But every day there’s plenty of fresh
grass again for me to consume, and I do so happily. The supply never vanishes,
but I don’t seem to have any faith in it. I wonder why I behave this way—what
kind of diseased thinking is this? What I gain during the day, I myself destroy
in the night! Why can’t I change? This has become my ingrained behavior, and
there’s nothing I can do about it.”
While he’s aware that he’s taking the wrong approach to life, nevertheless
the cow is unable to change. Habit has become so deeply implanted in his
mind that there’s no place for trust.
159
The Zoroastrian and the Moslem
Two men had been friends since childhood; one was a Moslem and the
other a Zoroastrian. One day as they were drinking coffee, the Moslem
turned to his friend and suggested: “My friend, how about you fi nally becoming a good Moslem?”
“If God wills it, I will convert,” said the Zoroastrian cunningly.
“Allah wants you to turn to Him so that He can save you from hell, but
it’s your menacing ego that pulls you back toward disbelief.”
“I know you as a fair man, my friend,” replied the Zoroastrian gravely.
“When that which you call the ego has conquered and continues to rule me,
I’ve no choice but to obey it, for it is far more powerful than me. I would never
dare think that anything in the world can be done without the will of God;
therefore, I conclude that if He truly wanted me not to be a Zoroastrian, He
wouldn’t have made me one!
“If your Allah holds absolute supremacy and dominates all realms but
still can’t pull me toward Him, then His will does not exceed all. So, what’s the
use of me converting? He has bestowed free will on us, and we’re responsible
for putting it to good use, which I hope I’m doing!”
Having spoken his mind, the Zoroastrian continued to sit beside the
Moslem, both quietly sipping their coffee in peace.
160
True Servitude
A destitute man was standing by the side of the road one day, hoping
to receive alms from passersby, when he saw a group of men walking
toward him dressed in colorful silk livery with brilliant, bejeweled belts. He
had never seen people like these before and asked a person standing nearby:
“Who might they be? Which kings and notables are they?”
“They’re not kings or dignitaries; they’re the servants of Omid of Khorasan, one of the sultan’s ministers.”
As soon as the poor man heard this, he turned to God in despair and
let the words roll off his tongue: “God, why don’t You, too, look after Your
servants like Omid of Khorasan does?”
The poor man uttered these ungrateful words out of desperation, for
he never had enough clothes to keep warm or enough food to stave off his
chronic hunger. But not long after the incident, the sultan turned against
Omid, accusing him of treachery, binding his arms and legs, and throwing
him in prison. He ordered Omid’s servants to be arrested, tortured, and interrogated until they divulged where Omid had hidden his treasure.
For an entire month, the innocent servants were tortured day and night.
The frustrated tormentors threatened to cut out their tongues if they didn’t
reveal where the treasure was kept, but none of them spoke. In the end, the
sultan became exasperated and ordered them to be killed. Their limbs were
severed from their bodies, their tongues were cut out, and their corpses were
thrown into a sewage-fi lled ditch outside town.
That very same night, when the poor man who had earlier cried out in
despair at the wealth of Omid’s servants was soundly asleep in the dark, damp
entryway of a neighborhood mosque, he had a revealing dream. In his dream,
a holy man approached him, saying: “This is a lesson for you! You must learn
how to be a true servant, like Omid’s men. Only then may you approach the
door of God and be worthy of seeking His grace!”
161
Love Pulls the Ear
Majnoun and Laily’s love affair was known to everyone, but some doubted
its sincerity. One day, a group of suspecting men, whose vision was
clearly constrained by their inferior intelligence, bumped into Majnoun as he
wandered through the streets, his head fi lled with thoughts of Laily.
“Hello, Majnoun,” one of the men called out. “We’ve been wondering
about it for some time and can’t fi gure out why you’re so madly in love with
Laily. She’s no beauty—what do you see in her?”
Majnoun was caught off guard; his mind was totally occupied with
thoughts of his beloved and couldn’t exactly catch the men’s train of thought.
He looked at them with baffl ement.
“Majnoun, don’t look so surprised; we’re serious! If you come with us,
we’ll introduce you to lots of beautiful girls, and you’ll never look at Laily
again!” another of the men boasted, quite pleased with himself.
“Your eyes are blind,” Majnoun retorted. “You can never see her beauty!
Not like I do! To only grasp what’s on the surface is the reaction of an idiot!”
He turned to walk away but changed his mind and came back to the
cluster of men.
“Let me tell you something,” he asserted, his voice rising with each new
phrase. “To only perceive what’s visible to the eye is like having a beautiful jug
but being oblivious to the real beauty of the wine inside, because you can only
see the container. I drink from a pitcher, and I taste the delectable wine; but
if you drink from the same vessel, God will only allow you to taste vinegar.
Laily’s love will never enter your hearts. Love for her shall never pull your ear.
I’ll taste honey from a pot while you’ll taste poison. Every person sees what
he chooses to see.”
This time, Majnoun pushed his way straight through the group of men
while holding his head high, more ecstatic in his love for Laily than ever before.
162
The Muezzin Caller
There was a town in the Levant where most of the inhabitants had not
yet converted to Islam. In this town lived a muezzin caller who was
cursed with the most exceptionally discordant voice. When he began the call
to prayer, everyone in the vicinity fl ed so as not to be within earshot. The
elders in the town were constantly pleading with the man to quit, believing
that, instead of calling people to prayer, he might actually be scaring them
away. Regardless, the man paid no heed to people’s opinions. Every day, he
climbed up the minaret and transmitted his ear-piercing call, sending people
scurrying to shield themselves from the unbearable noise.
One early dawn, a well-dressed man holding a tray full of sweets and
lit candles came to the center of the town and asked people how to fi nd the
muezzin. When people asked why, he said it was because the muezzin had
brought much comfort and calm to his household.
“How could his awful voice bring comfort to anyone ?” one townsperson
asked.
“I have a beautiful, delicate daughter who’s been wanting to convert to
Islam for some time now,” the well-dressed man replied. “We’ve been trying to
dissuade her, but to no avail. It’s as if love for Islam had penetrated her soul
and sunk its roots fi rm and deep.”
He took a long breath and gathered his composure, as he noticed that
everyone was eager to hear his story and wanted him to continue. “I was devastated, knowing that if she changed her faith, we would lose her. I didn’t want
to lose my child but couldn’t fi gure out what to do!”
“So, what made you look for the muezzin caller?” one onlooker asked
impatiently.
“It wasn’t until she heard the muezzin that everything changed!” he said
with a grin on his face. “When she heard him for the fi rst time, she was surprised, because she’d never heard such a horrible sound before. She couldn’t
believe that this noise was actually the Moslem call to prayer, so she asked
her sister, who confi rmed her worst doubts. But she still wasn’t convinced and 
163
asked several others, who all said the same thing. When she fi nally was forced
to accept that this was indeed the prayer call, all the attraction she had felt for
Islam vanished! She simply couldn’t reconcile that the beautiful faith she had
fallen in love with could include such an uncouth element. For the fi rst time
in ages I’ve been able to sleep soundly at night, and I owe it to the muezzin
caller!”
The father then spotted the man himself, who was making his way to the
mosque, and approached him, gratefully offering the gifts he had brought.
“At last you’ve put my mind to rest! You’ve given me back my daughter. If
I were a wealthier man, I would lay greater treasure before your feet without a
second thought. I’m forever indebted to you.”
Having expressed his gratitude, the father gave the tray of sweets and
candles to the muezzin caller and then hurried back home before the man
could begin his abrasive call.
164
The Jester and the Chess Game
Seyyed Ajal,4
 the powerful ruler of the province of Termez, had a great
love for the game of chess. One day, relaxing in his opulent palace, he
summoned the court jester to set up the chessboard, as he fancied a challenge.
Happy to comply, the jester eagerly prepared the board and sat before his
master, ready to begin. Only a few minutes into the game, though, the jester
suddenly jumped up and shouted, “Checkmate! Checkmate!” signaling that he
had beaten the ruler at his favorite game.
Seyyed Ajal was a sore loser and did not appreciate being embarrassed.
On this occasion, his anger got the better of him, and he began to hurl the
chess pieces at the jester. “All right, you won!” he screamed. “Here’s your
reward, you lowlife good-for-nothing.”
Seyyed Ajal cursed and threw every object within his reach at the poor,
innocent jester, who begged for forgiveness. But soon the Seyyed’s anger subsided and boredom got the better of him; he decided that he wanted another
game and so beckoned the jester back. The frightened man approached the
chessboard apprehensively but sat down to play. Once again, he beat his sovereign in a blink of any eye and had to call out the customary “Checkmate!
Checkmate!” But before he did, he ran to an adjacent room and hid underneath several layers of bedding to save himself from Seyyed Ajal’s anticipated
blows.
“What are you doing? Why are you hiding?” asked the ruler, when he
eventually located the jester.
“Checkmate! Checkmate! Checkmate!” called out the jester in fright.
“While in your service, this is the only way I dare to announce my win, my
lord!”
Such is the predicament of those who must live under unjust rulers with
no respect for their subjects, whom they are supposed to be protecting.
4 The name “Seyyed” indicates a descendant of the prophet Mohammad.
165
Guest on a Rainy Night
I
t was a rainy night, and a traveler found himself stranded in an unfamiliar
neighborhood. He had walked all day and was exhausted, hardly able to
focus, yet he suddenly realized that the door in front of him looked familiar.
He approached the house apprehensively and knocked gently, hoping that he
was not mistaken. When an old friend indeed opened the door and invited
him in warmly, his relief knew no bounds.
That evening down the street, the neighbors were having a circumcision
party for their youngest son, and the owner of the house and his wife had
been invited. Quietly, the couple decided between themselves that the husband
should stay behind and catch up with his friend while she would go to the
party. They also agreed that she should prepare the friend’s bedding well apart
from their own bedroom. The wife left the two men chatting away, reminiscing about the past as they sipped tea.
It was nearly midnight when the guest thanked his hospitable friend
and went directly to the couple’s bedroom, crept underneath the covers, and
instantly fell asleep. The host, much too exhausted and far too embarrassed
to wake his friend and tell him to change beds, snuck to the bed intended for
their guest and also fell asleep immediately.
Not long past midnight, the wife returned from the party all jovial and
excited. She quickly undressed and writhed her way underneath the covers next
to the man she thought was her husband. She caressed and kissed him a few
times and whispered in his ear: “My darling, I was so anxious that because of
this horrid rain that seemed to never end, we’d be stuck with this man all night
without a moment’s peace.”
The guest, now suddenly wide awake, heard her unkind words and, not
losing another minute, sprang out of the bed furiously. “I have sturdy shoes
and don’t fear the rain or the mud!” he exclaimed. “I’m out of here! You keep
your precious home for yourselves. A soul never rests while traveling!”
As he headed toward the door, the woman, feeling ashamed, grabbed
for his legs and begged him to stay, hoping that he would change his mind
and not leave her home with such animosity. But to no avail; it was too late 
166
for regrets. The husband also awoke during the commotion, and the couple
watched the man as he walked into the darkness, his face illuminating the
empty space before him and for miles ahead, like a ferociously burning candle.
They could hear his voice in their heads, saying to them: “I am the prophet
Kidr, and I have copious spiritual treasures to impart. I had intended to gift
some of them to you, but it wasn’t meant to be!”
The next day, the couple converted their home into a guesthouse, welcoming every traveler who came to their town, hoping that perhaps one more
time the prophet Kidr might appear at their humble abode.
MaSNaVi�Vi
168
Father’s Will
A father loved his stunningly beautiful daughter deeply and held her in
high regard. He also knew that she had to get married soon; otherwise,
her reputation might suffer. He felt that he had to protect her against the
fathomless jealousy of the town’s women, so when the girl, still young, came
of age, he agreed to marry her off. He bestowed her to a man whom he was
not convinced was the best choice; the man was not of the same social class,
nor was he fi nancially in a superior position. But the father had made up his
mind that the sooner the girl was married, the safer was her future.
“My darling daughter,” he advised her, “I’ve no choice but to give you
away to someone who’s not of the same stature as you. You can’t be sure of
him, so it would be best to avoid getting pregnant for some time yet.”
“Yes, sir, I’ll do as you wish,” the girl agreed obediently, trusting that her
father knew best.
Because the newly married couple lived not far from the girl’s father, he
saw her often and never failed to repeat his advice every time they met; and
the girl would show him her fl at stomach to put his mind at rest. But then,
one day, the girl became pregnant! She cunningly hid her condition from her
father for a good six months until it was no longer possible to hide her bump.
“What is this ?” scowled the father. “Didn’t I tell you to keep well away
from him? Or was my advice just some passing wind that never crossed your
threshold?” The father was beside himself, knowing that his daughter no longer had a way out.
“Father, please,” begged the girl. “You know that man and woman are
like cotton and fi re! How could I have avoided him forever? How was I to fl ee
the fi re?”
“I told you not to go to his bed!” the father bellowed. “And if he comes
to you, make sure that he doesn’t impregnate you! I told you to pull away when
you thought he was at the height of his pleasure!”
169
“How am I supposed to know when he’s about to peak?”
“When he becomes blurry eyed with a soft gaze, of course!” the father
almost shrieked.
“But, father, before his eyes go soft, both of my eyes have already gone
blind!”
The father knew well that his advice, albeit offered with what he thought
were the best of intentions, was only so much hot air, blowing by gently and
penetrating no one.
170
Poet in Aleppo
I
n bygone days, the people of Aleppo were mainly Shiite Moslems, and during the mourning month of Muharram, they held many heart-wrenching,
tear-jerking, back- and chest-beating ceremonies. Men and women alike gathered every year at the city’s Antioch Gate to mourn the brutal massacre of
Hossein, the prophet’s brave grandson, and his men by the cruel caliph Yazid.
The eerie sound of the mourners’ wailing could be heard well into the night,
reaching far into the desert and rising to the skies in heaven.
One year, a poet had traveled to Aleppo on the night of the ceremony,
the Ashura. When he heard the screams and mourning of the crowd, having
no clue what was going on, he followed the sound to Antioch Gate to see for
himself. When he saw the enormity of the gathering, he realized that the event
must be for an exceptional fi gure.
“Who’s this person whom you revere so much?” he inquired. “Tell me
about him, for I’m a poet, and I’d like to write a poem in his honor!”
“Are you mad? You’re obviously not a Shiite!” snapped one of the mourners with animosity. “How can you not know that today is the anniversary of
the death of Hossein, one of the most cherished fi gures in our history? For a
true Moslem, today is even more important than the day of Noah’s storm.”
“I do know about Ashura,” the poet defended himself. “But the age of
Yazid is long gone! How come you’ve only heard about this calamity now?
Everyone else in the world has heard of this disaster, even the blind and the
deaf. Has your lot been asleep all this time that you’ve only begun mourning
for him now?” The poet was genuinely perplexed. The mourners, for their
part, simply stared at the man, speechless.
“You’re truly ignorant!” the poet fi nally blurted, again unable to hold back
his tongue. “You should be crying for yourselves, because this deep slumber
of yours is worse than death itself! Those holy men were the kings of their
faith, and the day that their spirits separated from their bodies should be a day
for rejoicing! Had you any idea of their true nature, you would have known 
171
that today, for them, is a day of joyous celebration. You should all be mourning your own dead hearts instead, for you’ve no consciousness except for this
earthly existence!”
Without further delay, the poet gathered up his pen and paper and hastily
rode out of Aleppo, wary that if he remained one more hour in this town, he
might lose his faith in humankind and human intelligence altogether.
172
Tolerance
A young novice darvish had heard unending praise about the renowned
shaykh Abol-Hassan of Kharaghan, and he could not wait to meet him.
One day, he decided to take the long journey to the eastern province to fulfi ll
his enduring wish. The journey was arduous, and it took him weeks to reach
his destination. As soon as he arrived, he began to inquire about the shaykh’s
residence, and after hours of searching in the town’s back alleys, he found the
house at last. His heart was brimming with excitement and hope as he timidly
knocked on the door, waiting patiently for it to open.
“Who’s there?” came the sound of a woman’s voice.
“Hello; I’ve come to pay my respects to the revered shaykh, ma’am. I’ve
come all the way from Taleghan,” he whimpered.
“What an idiot! You’ve endured such a grueling journey to this godforsaken town, and for what? Didn’t you have anything better to do?” barked the
woman. “What useless thoughts did you entertain in your empty head? Or
perhaps it’s the devil who’s sent you here?”
There was no end to the woman’s bickering. She went on and on, ridiculing and bad-mouthing the shaykh himself, trying her best to kill every hope
in the young man’s heart.
“Despite all, ma’am, can you please tell me where I can fi nd the shaykh?”
implored the murid, tears welling up in his eyes.
“So you’re really looking for that charlatan, who plants lies in fools’ hearts
and ensnares them? He’s trapped thousands of idiots like you already. You’re
better off never seeing him and going back home unharmed. Beware, he’s a
real charmer,” she warned him. “A sorcerer must have tricked you into seeking
out this goat who resembles a man, and you and everyone else like you worship
him like buffoons. Stop caressing his ego; don’t encourage him further. Go on
and get out of here now.”
The young Sufi couldn’t believe his ears. He simply decided that the
woman must be mad and that he need no longer bother with her incriminating description of his beloved spiritual master. He carefully backed out of
the woman’s view and decided to ask others about the shaykh’s whereabouts.
173
But before he left, he couldn’t help saying to the woman, whom he fi nally
understood to be the shaykh’s wife: “The light of your husband has reached
East and West, yet you have no share of it. I will not return home because of
your malicious words, and I will not give up my search for the shaykh. There
are many bats like you who wish to smother the light of God, but I shall not
fall for your false words. Farewell, and may God save your pitiful soul!”
Having vented some of his anger, the murid began asking everyone he
came by for the shaykh’s whereabouts. It took a while, but in the end one person was able to direct him to a nearby forest, where the shaykh was apparently
gathering fi rewood. The young man hurried toward the woodland outside
town while wondering why on earth the shaykh had married and remained
married to such a vampire of a woman. He was baffl ed that two such opposite
poles of the spectrum could live compatibly with each other.
However, he quickly extinguished this train of thought, as he felt that he
was beginning to doubt the great man without knowing the full story. As he
thus reasoned with himself, he suddenly saw an elderly man comfortably sitting on top of a heap of fi rewood that was in turn stacked on the back of a
lion, using a huge snake as a whip to control the beast.
“Be careful, young man, to not let your thoughts wander too far from the
truth,” said the old man, having read the novice’s mind.
By the time the shaykh reached the murid, he could construe exactly what
had been exchanged between him and his wife, and he recounted the conversation to the young man, who listened in awe.
“I don’t tolerate her behavior simply to satisfy my own ego,” said the
shaykh. “Had I less patience, how could I have tamed a lion? I’m not merely
half-conscious of God’s will, nor do I allow myself to be infl uenced by what
people say or think. My entire being is under the command of the Almighty,
and I give up my life gladly for Him. I don’t tolerate her and others like her
for worldly reasons; I put up with them so others may see how magnanimous
my God has made me!”
Giving himself up completely to the will of his revered shaykh, the young
murid felt his heart expand with light as he knelt before the great man and
his obedient lion.
174
Camel, Bull, and Ram
For days, a starving camel, a bull, and a ram had roamed the prairie looking
for anything green to eat, but they had not succeeded in fi nding a single
morsel. The three kept each other company as they continued their search for
food, hoping that by sticking to each other they might have a better chance.
They searched under every rock and sniffed each dry bush that they thought
might bear an edible surprise, until fi nally they found a small bit of wilting
grass. They were overjoyed, hoping to feed their empty stomachs at last, albeit
with a meager prize.
“This bit of grass is not going to suffi ce for the three of us if we share
it. None of us will satisfy our hunger with this!” the ram said as he pointed
toward the grass with his nose. “I’ve an idea though! Why don’t we let the oldest of us feed on it, because respecting elders is a requirement in life. So let’s
each of us tell his age.”
Immediately after he had announced his plan, the ram volunteered his
age: “I’m the twin brother of the ram that the prophet Abraham sacrifi ced
instead of his son, Ishmael.”
“I’m the husband of the cow that Adam used to plough the fi elds after he
was expelled from paradise!” said the bull in turn.
When the camel heard them lie so blatantly, he bent down and pulled out
the grass with his mighty teeth. “It’s obvious that being as tall and capable as
I am, I’ve no need to be ancient like you to eat!” he said, not wasting another
moment as he patiently chewed the delectable weed, teaching them both an
invaluable lesson.
175
Treasure in Egypt
I
n Baghdad, there lived a man who had inherited great wealth. As he was
young and inexperienced, he spent frivolously and was soon penniless. On
the verge of becoming homeless, he turned to God, begging to be saved and
to recover his wealth. He cried endlessly, feeling remorseful that he had wasted
what had passed of his life and had nothing to show for it.
One day, having exhausted himself with many hours of lamenting and
weeping, the young man fell asleep and had a dream. In his dream, a voice
advised him to go to Egypt, where he was certain to fi nd a great treasure that
had been hidden for many years. What was keeping him, the voice persisted;
why didn’t he wake up and just go?
The man woke up in a strange mood, still trying to process the odd
dream he’d just had. He thought, with nothing more to lose, why not join the
fi rst caravan that was headed for Egypt? And that’s exactly what he did.
After several days, he arrived in Cairo, destitute, hungry, and unable to
secure shelter. He was too embarrassed to beg openly, fearful even in this
foreign city that he might bump into someone familiar from his more carefree
days. Thus, he decided to wait for the cover of darkness before exposing his
plight so that he could remain faceless. Although practically dying of hunger,
he struggled with the humility of having to beg. Back and forth he went,
undecided about how to approach people, and before he knew it, much of the
night had passed.
The previous week, there had been a few robberies in the neighborhood
where the man had ended up, and the police were on guard, having been reprimanded by the mayor for being too lenient on criminals. They were ordered
to arrest anyone who might look suspicious, even if the detainee happened
to be a relative of the caliph. The punishment for theft was nothing less than
the amputation of one’s arm! The police felt considerable pressure to fi nd
culprits, even if they weren’t sure that a suspect was actually guilty.
When they saw the poor man from Baghdad cowering in a dark corner
off the street and shivering in the cold night air, they were relentless and beat 
176
him mercilessly. The man cried out, begging them to allow him to explain why
he was there, and fi nally one of the policemen took pity on him and stopped
the others from beating him further.
“Go on, then, you’ve one minute to explain what you’re doing out in the
streets in the middle of the night! You don’t look like you’re from here. Tell
me, what’s your game?”
“I’m not a common thief,” whimpered the man helplessly. “I don’t go
around robbing people. I’m from Baghdad and a stranger in your city.”
Without further ado, the young man related his dream about the treasure;
the policeman, detecting a hint of honesty in his story, felt sorry and kindly
advised him: “I can see that you’re not a thief or a criminal, but you’re not
very intelligent, are you? How could you come all this way just because of a
dream you had?”
The poor man felt ashamed and lowered his eyes painfully. The policeman continued: “I, too, have dreamed many times that there’s a great treasure
buried in a neighborhood in Baghdad, in the basement of a house that belongs
to a Mr. X. Do you think I should’ve given up everything and just gone there?”
The young man heard his name uttered by the policeman in disbelief. To
make sure he had heard correctly, he asked him to repeat the name of the person in Baghdad he had just mentioned. When he heard his name spoken again,
he was ecstatic but tried not to show it. He begged the policemen’s forgiveness
and, the next morning, contentedly started making his way back to Baghdad,
wondering all the way why he had insisted on taking such an arduous journey,
tolerating such hardship and deprivation, to fi nd out in the end that what he
sought had been safe in his own home all along!
Bibliography
Forouzanfar, Badiozaman (ed.), 1994, Masnavi-e Ma’navi ye Mowlavi [The
Masnavi], 9th ed., Tehran, Zazeman e Entesharat e Javidan.
Ghasemzadeh, Mohammad (ed.), 1990, Dastanha-e Masnavi [Massnavi Stories],
Tehran, Hirmand Publishers.
Nicholson, Reynold A. (ed.), 1992, The Mathnawi of Jalaluddin Rumi, Delhi,
Adam Publishers & Distributers.
Zamani, Karim (ed.), 1998, Masnavi-e Ma’navi, 5th ed., Tehran, Entesharat-e
Etela’at.
haMpToN roaDS pUBliShiNg CoMpaNy
. . . for the evolving human spirit
Hampton Roads Publishing Company publishes books on a variety of
subjects, including spirituality, health, and other related topics.
For a copy of our latest trade catalog, call (978) 465-0504 or visit our
distributor’s website at www.redwheelweiser.com. You can also sign up for our
newsletter and special offers by going to www.redwheelweiser.com/newsletter/.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Rumi (Jalāl od-Din Mohammad
Balkhi) was a 13th-century Persian
Sunni Muslim poet, jurist, Islamic
scholar, theologian, and Sufi mystic.
Maryam Mafi was born and raised
in Iran. She graduated from Tufts
University in 1977, and while reading
for her master's degree in international
communications at American and
Georgetown Universities, she began
translating Persian literature and has
been doing so ever since. Maryam
lives in London.
Narguess Farzad is a senior fellow
in Persian studies at the School of
Oriental and African Studies at the
University of London.
U.S. $16.95
www.redwheelweiser.com
From The Book of Rumi
The Zoroastrian and the Moslem
Two men had been friends since childhood; one was a Moslem and
the other a Zoroastrian. One day as they were drinking coffee the
Moslem turned to his friend and suggested: “My friend, how about you
fi nally becoming a good Moslem?”
“If God wills it, I will convert,” said the Zoroastrian cunningly.
“Allah wants you to turn to Him so that He can save you from
hell, but it’s your menacing ego that pulls you back toward disbelief.”
“I know you as a fair man, my friend,” replied the Zoroastrian
gravely. “When that which you call the ego has conquered and continues to
rule me, I’ve no choice but to obey it, for it is far more powerful than me. I
would never dare think that anything in the world can be done without the
will of God; therefore, I conclude that if He truly wanted me not to be a
Zoroastrian, He wouldn’t have made me one!
“If your Allah holds absolute supremacy and dominates all realms
but still can’t pull me toward Him, then His will does not exceed all. So,
what’s the use of me converting? He has bestowed free will on us, and we’re
responsible for putting it to good use, which I hope I’m doing!”
Having spoken his mind, the Zoroastrian continued to sit beside
the Moslem, both quietly sipping their coffee in peace.